
1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2020;1131:625-648. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-12457-1_25.

Calcium Channels and Calcium-Regulated Channels in Human Red Blood Cells.

Kaestner L(1)(2), Bogdanova A(3), Egee S(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Theoretical Medicine and Biosciences, Saarland University, Homburg, Germany.
lars_kaestner@me.com.
(2)Experimental Physics, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany.
lars_kaestner@me.com.
(3)Red Blood Cell Research Group, Institute of Veterinary Physiology, Vetsuisse
Faculty and the Zürich Center for Integrative Human Physiology (ZIHP), University
of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(4)CNRS, UMR8227 LBI2M, Sorbonne Université, Roscoff, France.
(5)Laboratoire d'Excellence GR-Ex, Paris, France.

Free Calcium (Ca2+) is an important and universal signalling entity in all cells,
red blood cells included. Although mature mammalian red blood cells are believed 
to not contain organelles as Ca2+ stores such as the endoplasmic reticulum or
mitochondria, a 20,000-fold gradient based on a intracellular Ca2+ concentration 
of approximately 60 nM vs. an extracellular concentration of 1.2 mM makes
Ca2+-permeable channels a major signalling tool of red blood cells. However, the 
internal Ca2+ concentration is tightly controlled, regulated and maintained
primarily by the Ca2+ pumps PMCA1 and PMCA4. Within the last two decades it
became evident that an increased intracellular Ca2+ is associated with red blood 
cell clearance in the spleen and promotes red blood cell aggregability and clot
formation. In contrast to this rather uncontrolled deadly Ca2+ signals only
recently it became evident, that a temporal increase in intracellular Ca2+ can
also have positive effects such as the modulation of the red blood cells O2
binding properties or even be vital for brief transient cellular volume
adaptation when passing constrictions like small capillaries or slits in the
spleen. Here we give an overview of Ca2+ channels and Ca2+-regulated channels in 
red blood cells, namely the Gárdos channel, the non-selective voltage dependent
cation channel, Piezo1, the NMDA receptor, VDAC, TRPC channels, CaV2.1, a
Ca2+-inhibited channel novel to red blood cells and i.a. relate these channels to
the molecular unknown sickle cell disease conductance Psickle. Particular
attention is given to correlation of functional measurements with molecular
entities as well as the physiological and pathophysiological function of these
channels. This view is in constant progress and in particular the understanding
of the interaction of several ion channels in a physiological context just
started. This includes on the one hand channelopathies, where a mutation of the
ion channel is the direct cause of the disease, like Hereditary Xerocytosis and
the Gárdos Channelopathy. On the other hand it applies to red blood cell related 
diseases where an altered channel activity is a secondary effect like in sickle
cell disease or thalassemia. Also these secondary effects should receive medical 
and pharmacologic attention because they can be crucial when it comes to the
life-threatening symptoms of the disease.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-12457-1_25 
PMID: 31646528  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 2019 Jul 1;1865(7):1925-1937. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2018.08.030. Epub 2018 Aug 26.

Role of iron metabolism in heart failure: From iron deficiency to iron overload.

Zhang H(1), Zhabyeyev P(1), Wang S(2), Oudit GY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Canada; Mazankowski Alberta
Heart Institute, Canada.
(2)Mazankowski Alberta Heart Institute, Canada; Division of Cardiac Surgery,
Department of Surgery, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(3)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Canada; Mazankowski Alberta
Heart Institute, Canada. Electronic address: gavin.oudit@ualberta.ca.

Iron metabolism is a balancing act, and biological systems have evolved exquisite
regulatory mechanisms to maintain iron homeostasis. Iron metabolism disorders are
widespread health problems on a global scale and range from iron deficiency to
iron-overload. Both types of iron disorders are linked to heart failure. Iron
play a fundamental role in mitochondrial function and various enzyme functions
and iron deficiency has a particular negative impact on mitochondria function.
Given the high-energy demand of the heart, iron deficiency has a particularly
negative impact on heart function and exacerbates heart failure. Iron-overload
can result from excessive gut absorption of iron or frequent use of blood
transfusions and is typically seen in patients with congenital anemias, sickle
cell anemia and beta-thalassemia major, or in patients with primary
hemochromatosis. This review provides an overview of normal iron metabolism,
mechanisms underlying development of iron disorders in relation to heart failure,
including iron-overload cardiomyopathy, and clinical perspective on the treatment
options for iron metabolism disorders.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2018.08.030 
PMID: 31109456 


3. Redox Biol. 2019 Apr;22:101165. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2019.101165. Epub 2019 Mar
10.

Mitochondria in precision medicine; linking bioenergetics and metabolomics in
platelets.

Chacko BK(1), Smith MR(2), Johnson MS(1), Benavides G(1), Culp ML(1), Pilli J(3),
Shiva S(3), Uppal K(2), Go YM(2), Jones DP(2), Darley-Usmar VM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Mitochondrial Medicine Laboratory, Department of Pathology, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, UK.
(2)Clinical Biomarkers Laboratory, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical
Care Medicine, Emory School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology & Chemical Biology, Vascular Medicine Institute,
Center for Metabolism & Mitochondrial Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(4)Mitochondrial Medicine Laboratory, Department of Pathology, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, UK. Electronic address: vdarleyusmar@uabmc.edu.

Mitochondria possess reserve bioenergetic capacity, supporting protection and
resilience in the face of disease. Approaches are limited to understand factors
that impact mitochondrial functional reserve in humans. We applied the
mitochondrial stress test (MST) to platelets from healthy subjects and found
correlations between energetic parameters and mitochondrial function. These
parameters were not correlated with mitochondrial complex I-IV activities,
however, suggesting that other factors affect mitochondrial bioenergetics and
metabolism. Platelets from African American patients with sickle cell disease
also differed from controls, further showing that other factors impact
mitochondrial bioenergetics and metabolism. To test for correlations of platelet 
metabolites with energetic parameters, we performed an integrated analysis of
metabolomics and MST parameters. Subsets of metabolites, including fatty acids
and xenobiotics correlated with mitochondrial parameters. The results establish
platelets as a platform to integrate bioenergetics and metabolism for analysis of
mitochondrial function in precision medicine.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2019.101165 
PMCID: PMC6436140
PMID: 30877854 


4. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2018 Oct 1;315(4):R840-R847. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00440.2017. Epub 2018 Aug 1.

Potential role of LSD1 inhibitors in the treatment of sickle cell disease: a
review of preclinical animal model data.

Rivers A(1)(2), Jagadeeswaran R(1)(2), Lavelle D(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Illinois at Chicago , Chicago,
Illinois.
(2)Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center , Chicago, Illinois.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago , Chicago, Illinois.

Sickle cell disease (SCD) is caused by a mutation of the β-globin gene (Ingram
VM. Nature 180: 326-328, 1957), which triggers the polymerization of deoxygenated
sickle hemoglobin (HbS). Approximately 100,000 SCD patients in the United States 
and millions worldwide (Piel FB, et al. PLoS Med 10: e1001484, 2013) suffer from 
chronic hemolytic anemia, painful crises, multisystem organ damage, and reduced
life expectancy (Rees DC, et al. Lancet 376: 2018-2031, 2010; Serjeant GR. Cold
Spring Harb Perspect Med 3: a011783, 2013). Hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation can be curative, but the majority of patients do not have a
suitable donor (Talano JA, Cairo MS. Eur J Haematol 94: 391-399, 2015). Advanced 
gene-editing technologies also offer the possibility of a cure (Goodman MA, Malik
P. Ther Adv Hematol 7: 302-315, 2016; Lettre G, Bauer DE. Lancet 387: 2554-2564, 
2016), but the likelihood that these strategies can be mobilized to treat the
large numbers of patients residing in developing countries is remote. A
pharmacological treatment to increase fetal hemoglobin (HbF) as a therapy for SCD
has been a long-sought goal, because increased levels of HbF (α2γ2) inhibit the
polymerization of HbS (Poillin WN, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90: 5039-5043,
1993; Sunshine HR, et al. J Mol Biol 133: 435-467, 1979) and are associated with 
reduced symptoms and increased lifespan of SCD patients (Platt OS, et al. N Engl 
J Med 330: 1639-1644, 1994; Platt OS, et al. N Engl J Med 325: 11-16, 1991). Only
two drugs, hydroxyurea and l-glutamine, are approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration for treatment of SCD. Hydroxyurea is ineffective at HbF induction 
in ~50% of patients (Charache S, et al. N Engl J Med 332: 1317-1322, 1995). While
polymerization of HbS has been traditionally considered the driving force in the 
hemolysis of SCD, the excessive reactive oxygen species generated from red blood 
cells, with further amplification by intravascular hemolysis, also are a major
contributor to SCD pathology. This review highlights a new class of drugs,
lysine-specific demethylase (LSD1) inhibitors, that induce HbF and reduce
reactive oxygen species.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpregu.00440.2017 
PMCID: PMC6734057
PMID: 30067082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biol Chem. 2018 Jun 15;293(24):9248-9264. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA117.000834. Epub
2018 May 3.

Deletion of ferroportin in murine myeloid cells increases iron accumulation and
stimulates osteoclastogenesis in vitro and in vivo.

Wang L(1)(2), Fang B(2)(3), Fujiwara T(2), Krager K(4), Gorantla A(4), Li C(5),
Feng JQ(5), Jennings ML(6), Zhou J(7), Aykin-Burns N(8), Zhao H(9)(6)(10)(11).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Orthopedics, First Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, Anhui 230022, China.
(2)the Center for Osteoporosis and Metabolic Bone Diseases, Division of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine.
(3)the Department of Hematology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, China.
(4)Division of Radiation Health, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, and.
(5)the Department of Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M College of Dentistry, Dallas,
Texas 75246.
(6)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas 72205.
(7)From the Department of Orthopedics, First Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, Anhui 230022, China, zhoujian831207@163.com.
(8)Division of Radiation Health, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, and
NAykinburns@uams.edu.
(9)the Center for Osteoporosis and Metabolic Bone Diseases, Division of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, hzhao@uams.edu.
(10)the Research Department, Tibor Rubin Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Veterans Affairs Long Beach Healthcare System, Long Beach, California 90822, and.
(11)the Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University of
California at Irvine, Irvine, California 92697.

Osteoporosis, osteopenia, and pathological bone fractures are frequent
complications of iron-overload conditions such as hereditary hemochromatosis,
thalassemia, and sickle cell disease. Moreover, animal models of iron overload
have revealed increased bone resorption and decreased bone formation. Although
systemic iron overload affects multiple organs and tissues, leading to
significant changes on bone modeling and remodeling, the cell autonomous effects 
of excessive iron on bone cells remain unknown. Here, to elucidate the role of
cellular iron homeostasis in osteoclasts, we generated two mouse strains in which
solute carrier family 40 member 1 (Slc40a1), a gene encoding ferroportin (FPN),
the sole iron exporter in mammalian cells, was specifically deleted in myeloid
osteoclast precursors or mature cells. The FPN deletion mildly increased iron
levels in both precursor and mature osteoclasts, and its loss in precursors, but 
not in mature cells, increased osteoclastogenesis and decreased bone mass in vivo
Of note, these phenotypes were more pronounced in female than in male mice. In
vitro studies revealed that the elevated intracellular iron promoted macrophage
proliferation and amplified expression of nuclear factor of activated T cells 1
(Nfatc1) and PPARG coactivator 1β (Pgc-1β), two transcription factors critical
for osteoclast differentiation. However, the iron excess did not affect
osteoclast survival. While increased iron stimulated global mitochondrial
metabolism in osteoclast precursors, it had little influence on mitochondrial
mass and reactive oxygen species production. These results indicate that
FPN-regulated intracellular iron levels are critical for mitochondrial
metabolism, osteoclastogenesis, and skeletal homeostasis in mice.

© 2018 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA117.000834 
PMCID: PMC6005439
PMID: 29724825  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Heart Fail Rev. 2018 Sep;23(5):801-816. doi: 10.1007/s10741-018-9700-5.

Involvement of cytosolic and mitochondrial iron in iron overload cardiomyopathy: 
an update.

Gordan R(1), Wongjaikam S(2)(3)(4), Gwathmey JK(1)(5), Chattipakorn N(2)(3)(4),
Chattipakorn SC(2)(4)(6), Xie LH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, Rutgers University-New
Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey, 07103, USA.
(2)Cardiac Electrophysiology Research and Training Center, Faculty of Medicine,
Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(3)Cardiac Electrophysiology Unit, Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine,
Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(4)Center of Excellence in Cardiac Electrophysiology Research, Chiang Mai
University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(5)Gwathmey Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Department of Oral Biology and Diagnostic Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry,
Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(7)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, Rutgers University-New
Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey, 07103, USA. xiela@njms.rutgers.edu.

Iron overload cardiomyopathy (IOC) is a major cause of death in patients with
diseases associated with chronic anemia such as thalassemia or sickle cell
disease after chronic blood transfusions. Associated with iron overload
conditions, there is excess free iron that enters cardiomyocytes through both L- 
and T-type calcium channels thereby resulting in increased reactive oxygen
species being generated via Haber-Weiss and Fenton reactions. It is thought that 
an increase in reactive oxygen species contributes to high morbidity and
mortality rates. Recent studies have, however, suggested that it is iron overload
in mitochondria that contributes to cellular oxidative stress, mitochondrial
damage, cardiac arrhythmias, as well as the development of cardiomyopathy. Iron
chelators, antioxidants, and/or calcium channel blockers have been demonstrated
to prevent and ameliorate cardiac dysfunction in animal models as well as in
patients suffering from cardiac iron overload. Hence, either a mono-therapy or
combination therapies with any of the aforementioned agents may serve as a novel 
treatment in iron-overload patients in the near future. In the present article,
we review the mechanisms of cytosolic and/or mitochondrial iron load in the heart
which may contribute synergistically or independently to the development of
iron-associated cardiomyopathy. We also review available as well as potential
future novel treatments.

DOI: 10.1007/s10741-018-9700-5 
PMCID: PMC6093778
PMID: 29675595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Front Physiol. 2017 Dec 19;8:1082. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.01082. eCollection
2017.

Oxidized Mutant Human Hemoglobins S and E Induce Oxidative Stress and
Bioenergetic Dysfunction in Human Pulmonary Endothelial Cells.

Jana S(1), Meng F(1), Hirsch RE(2), Friedman JM(3), Alayash AI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Vascular Biology, Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD, United 
States.
(2)Hematology Division, Department of Medicine and Department of Anatomy and
Structural Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, United
States.
(3)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Bronx, NY, United States.

Cell free hemoglobin (Hb), becomes oxidized in the circulation during hemolytic
episodes in sickle cell disease (SCD) or thalassemia and may potentially cause
major complications that are damaging to the vascular system. Hemolytic anemias
are commonly associated with pulmonary hypertension (PH) and often result from
dysfunction of lung endothelial cells. The aim of this study was to determine the
effect of different Hbs on cultured human lung endothelial function. Toward this 
goal, endothelial permeability, oxidative stress response parameters, glycolytic 
and mitochondrial bioenergetic functions were monitored in cultured human
pulmonary arterial endothelial cells (HPAEC) following incubation with human
adult Hb (HbA), and Hb isolated from patients with sickle cell Hb (HbS, βV6E) and
HbE (βE26K) that commonly co-exist with β-thalassemia. These mutant Hbs are known
for their distinct oxidative profiles. HPAEC treated with the ferrous forms of
HbE, HbS for 24 h showed higher loss of endothelial monolayer integrity with
concomitant rise in reactive oxygen radical production, lipid hydroperoxide
formation and higher expressions of oxidative stress response proteins including 
heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) accompanied by a rise in uncoupled mitochondrial
respiration. Loss of membrane permeability was diminished in part by haptoglobin 
(Hp, protein scavenger), hemopexin (Hpx, heme scavenger) or ascorbate (reducing
agent). To understand the role of Hb oxidation, HPAEC were exposed to ferric or
ferryl states of the mutant Hbs. Ferryl forms of all proteins caused a
significant damage to the endothelial monolayer integrity at a higher degree than
their respective ferric Hbs. Ferryl forms of HbS and HbE also caused a loss of
respiratory chain complex activities in isolated endothelial mitochondria and
basal oxygen consumption in HPAEC. However, longer incubation with ferryl Hbs
produced bioenergetic reprogramming including higher degree of uncoupled
respiration and glycolytic rate. The data in this report collectively indicate
that higher oxidation forms of HbS and HbE cause endothelial dysfunction through 
distinct damaging mechanisms involving mitochondrial bioenergetic function.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2017.01082 
PMCID: PMC5742253
PMID: 29311995 


8. Thromb Haemost. 2017 Oct 5;117(10):1859-1867. doi: 10.1160/TH17-03-0174. Epub
2017 Aug 3.

Superoxide Dismutase 2 is dispensable for platelet function.

Fidler TP, Rowley JW, Araujo C, Boudreau LH, Marti A, Souvenir R, Dale K, Boilard
E, Weyrich AS, Abel ED(1).

Author information: 
(1)E. Dale Abel, MB.BS., DPhil., Fraternal Order of Eagles Diabetes Research
Center, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver
College of Medicine, University of Iowa, 4312 PBDB, 169 Newton Road, Iowa City,
IA 52242-1101, USA, Tel.: +1 (319) 353 3050, Fax: +1 (319) 335 3865, E-mail:
DRCadmin@uiowa.edu.

Increased intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) promote platelet
activation. The sources of platelet-derived ROS are diverse and whether or not
mitochondrial derived ROS, modulates platelet function is incompletely
understood. Studies of platelets from patients with sickle cell disease, and
diabetes suggest a correlation between mitochondrial ROS and platelet
dysfunction. Therefore, we generated mice with a platelet specific knockout of
superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2-KO) to determine if increased mitochondrial ROS
increases platelet activation. SOD2-KO platelets demonstrated decreased SOD2
activity and increased mitochondrial ROS, however total platelet ROS was
unchanged. Mitochondrial function and content were maintained in non-stimulated
platelets. However SOD2-KO platelets demonstrated decreased mitochondrial
function following thrombin stimulation. In vitro platelet activation and
spreading was normal and in vivo, deletion of SOD2 did not change tail-bleeding
or arterial thrombosis indices. In pathophysiological models mediated by
platelet-dependent immune mechanisms such as sepsis and autoimmune inflammatory
arthritis, SOD2-KO mice were phenotypically identical to wildtype controls. These
data demonstrate that increased mitochondrial ROS does not result in platelet
dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1160/TH17-03-0174 
PMCID: PMC5894334
PMID: 28771279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Exp Hematol. 2017 Jun;50:46-52. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2017.02.003. Epub 2017 Feb 
24.

Pharmacological inhibition of LSD1 and mTOR reduces mitochondrial retention and
associated ROS levels in the red blood cells of sickle cell disease.

Jagadeeswaran R(1), Vazquez BA(2), Thiruppathi M(3), Ganesh BB(4), Ibanez V(5),
Cui S(6), Engel JD(7), Diamond AM(8), Molokie RE(5), DeSimone J(5), Lavelle D(5),
Rivers A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA;
Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Research Resources Center, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL,
USA.
(5)Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA; Department of
Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA.
(8)Department of Pathology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA;
Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA. Electronic
address: riversa@uic.edu.

Sickle cell disease (SCD), an inherited blood disorder caused by a point mutation
that renders hemoglobin susceptible to polymerization when deoxygenated, affects 
millions of people worldwide. Manifestations of SCD include chronic hemolytic
anemia, inflammation, painful vaso-occlusive crises, multisystem organ damage,
and reduced life expectancy. Part of SCD pathophysiology is the excessive
formation of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) in SCD red blood cells
(RBCs), which accelerates their hemolysis. Normal RBC precursors eliminate their 
mitochondria during the terminal differentiation process. Strikingly, we observed
an increased percentage of RBCs retaining mitochondria in SCD patient blood
samples compared with healthy individuals. In addition, using an experimental SCD
mouse model, we demonstrate that excessive levels of ROS in SCD are associated
with this abnormal mitochondrial retention. Interestingly, the LSD1 inhibitor,
RN-1, and the mitophagy-inducing agent mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
inhibitor, sirolimus, increased RBC lifespan and reduced ROS accumulation in
parallel with reducing mitochondria-retaining RBCs in the SCD mouse model.
Furthermore, gene expression analysis of SCD mice treated with RN-1 showed
increased expression of mitophagy genes. Our findings suggest that reduction of
mitochondria-retaining RBCs may provide a new therapeutic approach to preventing 
excessive ROS in SCD.

Copyright © 2017 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exphem.2017.02.003 
PMCID: PMC6263958
PMID: 28238805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biol Chem. 2015 Nov 13;290(46):27939-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.651257. Epub
2015 Sep 22.

Sickle Cell Hemoglobin in the Ferryl State Promotes βCys-93 Oxidation and
Mitochondrial Dysfunction in Epithelial Lung Cells (E10).

Kassa T(1), Jana S(1), Strader MB(1), Meng F(1), Jia Y(1), Wilson MT(2), Alayash 
AI(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Laboratory of Biochemistry and Vascular Biology, Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland
20993 and.
(2)the Department of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park,
Colchester CO4 3SQ, United Kingdom.
(3)From the Laboratory of Biochemistry and Vascular Biology, Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland
20993 and abdu.alayash@fda.hhs.gov.

Polymerization of intraerythrocytic deoxyhemoglobin S (HbS) is the primary
molecular event that leads to hemolytic anemia in sickle cell disease (SCD). We
reasoned that HbS may contribute to the complex pathophysiology of SCD in part
due to its pseudoperoxidase activity. We compared oxidation reactions and the
turnover of oxidation intermediates of purified human HbS and HbA. Hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2) drives a catalytic cycle that includes the following three
distinct steps: 1) initial oxidation of ferrous (oxy) to ferryl Hb; 2)
autoreduction of the ferryl intermediate to ferric (metHb); and 3) reaction of
metHb with an additional H2O2 molecule to regenerate the ferryl intermediate.
Ferrous and ferric forms of both proteins underwent initial oxidation to the
ferryl heme in the presence of H2O2 at equal rates. However, the rate of
autoreduction of ferryl to the ferric form was slower in the HbS solutions. Using
quantitative mass spectrometry and the spin trap,
5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide, we found more irreversibly oxidized βCys-93in
HbS than in HbA. Incubation of the ferric or ferryl HbS with cultured lung
epithelial cells (E10) induced a drop in mitochondrial oxygen consumption rate
and impairment of cellular bioenergetics that was related to the redox state of
the iron. Ferryl HbS induced a substantial drop in the mitochondrial
transmembrane potential and increases in cytosolic heme oxygenase (HO-1)
expression and mitochondrial colocalization in E10 cells. Thus, highly oxidizing 
ferryl Hb and heme, the product of oxidation, may be central to the evolution of 
vasculopathy in SCD and may suggest therapeutic modalities that interrupt
heme-mediated inflammation.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.651257 
PMCID: PMC4646035
PMID: 26396189  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mitochondrial DNA A DNA Mapp Seq Anal. 2016 Sep;27(5):3481-2. doi:
10.3109/19401736.2015.1066358. Epub 2015 Aug 10.

Characterization of the complete mitochondrial genome of Sickle pomfret
Taractichthys steindachneri (Perciformes: Bramidae).

Li W(1), Tian S(1)(2)(3), Zhu J(1)(2)(3), Wu F(1)(2)(3), Wang K(1), Dai
X(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a College of Marine Sciences, Shanghai Ocean University , Shanghai , P.R.
China .
(2)b National Engineering Research Center for Oceanic Fisheries , Shanghai ,
China , and.
(3)c Scientific Observing and Experimental Station of Oceanic Fisheries Resources
and Environment, Ministry of Agriculture , Shanghai , P.R. China.

The complete mitogenome sequence of Taractichthys steindachneri was sequenced and
analyzed in this study. The complete mitogenome of T. steindachneri is 16 723 bp 
in length, which contains 22 transfer RNAs, 2 ribosomal RNAs, 13 protein-coding
genes and 2 non-coding region, a rep region and a control region (D-loop). This
study will be useful for studying on the molecular systematic, taxonomic status
and conservation genetics.

DOI: 10.3109/19401736.2015.1066358 
PMID: 26258504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS One. 2015 May 29;10(5):e0128694. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128694.
eCollection 2015.

Mechanism of testosterone deficiency in the transgenic sickle cell mouse.

Musicki B(1), Zhang Y(1), Chen H(2), Brown TR(2), Zirkin BR(2), Burnett AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute and Department of Urology, The
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Johns Hopkins Bloomberg 
School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Testosterone deficiency is associated with sickle cell disease (SCD), but its
underlying mechanism is not known. We investigated the possible occurrence and
mechanism of testosterone deficiency in a mouse model of human SCD. Transgenic
sickle male mice (Sickle) exhibited decreased serum and intratesticular
testosterone and increased luteinizing hormone (LH) levels compared with wild
type (WT) mice, indicating primary hypogonadism in Sickle mice. LH-, dbcAMP-, and
pregnenolone- (but not 22-hydroxycholesterol)- stimulated testosterone production
by Leydig cells isolated from the Sickle mouse testis was decreased compared to
that of WT mice, implying defective Leydig cell steroidogenesis. There also was
reduced protein expression of steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (STAR), but 
not cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc), in the Sickle mouse testis.
These data suggest that the capacity of P450scc to support testosterone
production may be limited by the supply of cholesterol to the mitochondria in
Sickle mice. The sickle mouse testis exhibited upregulated NADPH oxidase subunit 
gp91phox and increased oxidative stress, measured as 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal, and
unchanged protein expression of an antioxidant glutathione peroxidase-1. Mice
heterozygous for the human sickle globin (Hemi) exhibited intermediate
hypogonadal changes between those of WT and Sickle mice. These results
demonstrate that testosterone deficiency occurs in Sickle mice, mimicking the
human condition. The defects in the Leydig cell steroidogenic pathway in Sickle
mice, mainly due to reduced availability of cholesterol for testosterone
production, may be related to NADPH oxidase-derived oxidative stress. Our
findings suggest that targeting testicular oxidative stress or steroidogenesis
mechanisms in SCD offers a potential treatment for improving phenotypic changes
associated with testosterone deficiency in this disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128694 
PMCID: PMC4449127
PMID: 26023917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Sep 30;111(39):E4110-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1405023111. Epub 2014 Sep 15.

Hemolysis-induced lethality involves inflammasome activation by heme.

Dutra FF(1), Alves LS(1), Rodrigues D(1), Fernandez PL(2), de Oliveira RB(3),
Golenbock DT(3), Zamboni DS(4), Bozza MT(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Inflamação e Imunidade, Departamento de Imunologia, Instituto
de Microbiologia, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, 21941-902, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil;
(2)Centro de Biología Celular y Molecular de Enfermedades, Instituto de
Investigaciones Científicas y Servicios de Alta Tecnología, 0843-01103, Panama
City, Panama;
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605; and.
(4)Departamento de Biologia Celular, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto,
Universidade de São Paulo, 14049-900, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Laboratório de Inflamação e Imunidade, Departamento de Imunologia, Instituto
de Microbiologia, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, 21941-902, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil; mbozza@micro.ufrj.br.

The increase of extracellular heme is a hallmark of hemolysis or extensive cell
damage. Heme has prooxidant, cytotoxic, and inflammatory effects, playing a
central role in the pathogenesis of malaria, sepsis, and sickle cell disease.
However, the mechanisms by which heme is sensed by innate immune cells
contributing to these diseases are not fully characterized. We found that heme,
but not porphyrins without iron, activated LPS-primed macrophages promoting the
processing of IL-1β dependent on nucleotide-binding domain and leucine rich
repeat containing family, pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3). The activation of
NLRP3 by heme required spleen tyrosine kinase, NADPH oxidase-2, mitochondrial
reactive oxygen species, and K(+) efflux, whereas it was independent of heme
internalization, lysosomal damage, ATP release, the purinergic receptor P2X7, and
cell death. Importantly, our results indicated the participation of macrophages, 
NLRP3 inflammasome components, and IL-1R in the lethality caused by sterile
hemolysis. Thus, understanding the molecular pathways affected by heme in innate 
immune cells might prove useful to identify new therapeutic targets for diseases 
that have heme release.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1405023111 
PMCID: PMC4191786
PMID: 25225402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Blood. 2014 May 1;123(18):2864-72. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-09-529420. Epub 2014
Mar 27.

Platelet bioenergetic screen in sickle cell patients reveals mitochondrial
complex V inhibition, which contributes to platelet activation.

Cardenes N(1), Corey C, Geary L, Jain S, Zharikov S, Barge S, Novelli EM, Shiva
S.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Medicine Institute and.

Bioenergetic dysfunction, although central to the pathogenesis of numerous
diseases, remains uncharacterized in many patient populations because of the
invasiveness of obtaining tissue for mitochondrial studies. Although platelets
are an accessible source of mitochondria, the role of bioenergetics in regulating
platelet function remains unclear. Herein, we validate extracellular flux
analysis in human platelets and use this technique to screen for mitochondrial
dysfunction in sickle cell disease (SCD) patients, a population with aberrant
platelet activation of an unknown mechanism and in which mitochondrial function
has never been assessed. We identify a bioenergetic alteration in SCD patients
characterized by deficient complex V activity, leading to decreased mitochondrial
respiration, membrane hyperpolarization, and augmented oxidant production
compared with healthy subjects. This dysfunction correlates with platelet
activation and hemolysis in vivo and can be recapitulated in vitro by exposing
healthy platelets to hemoglobin or a complex V inhibitor. Further, reproduction
of this dysfunction in vitro activates healthy platelets, an effect prevented by 
attenuation of mitochondrial hyperpolarization or by scavenging mitochondrial
oxidants. These data identify bioenergetic dysfunction in SCD patients for the
first time and establish mitochondrial hyperpolarization and oxidant generation
as potential pathogenic mechanism in SCD as well as a modulator of healthy
platelet function.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2013-09-529420 
PMCID: PMC4007612
PMID: 24677541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Transfusion. 2013 Feb;53(2):424-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2012.03774.x. Epub
2012 Jul 15.

Oxygen: the poison is in the dose.

Winslow RM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, USA.

Cell-free hemoglobin (Hb) has been blamed for a spectrum of problems, including
vasoconstriction pancreatitis, myocardial infarction, and pulmonary hypertension 
in hemolytic anemia, malaria, and sickle cell anemia, and from Hb-based oxygen
carriers (HBOCs). Toxicities have been attributed to scavenging of nitric oxide
(NO). However, while NO scavenging may explain many in vitro effects, and some
effects in animal models and clinical trials with HBOCs, key inconsistencies in
the theory require alternative explanations. This review considers the hypothesis
that cell-free Hb oversupplies oxygen to tissues, leading to oxygen-related
toxicity, possibly through formation of reactive oxygen species and local
destruction of NO. Evidence for this hypothesis comes from various sources,
establishing that tissue oxygen levels are maintained over very narrow (and low) 
levels, even at high oxygen consumption. Tissue is normally protected from
excessive oxygen by its extremely low solubility in plasma, but introduction of
cell-free Hb, even at low concentration, greatly augments oxygen supply, engaging
protective mechanisms that include vasoconstriction and ischemia. The requirement
to limit oxygen supply by cell-free Hb suggests novel ways to modify it to
overcome vasoconstriction, independent of the intrinsic reaction of Hb with NO.
This control is essential to the design of a safe and effective cell-free HBOC.

© 2012 American Association of Blood Banks.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2012.03774.x 
PMID: 22804568  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2004;559:211-7.

Erythrocyte ion channels in regulation of apoptosis.

Lang F(1), Birka C, Myssina S, Lang KS, Lang PA, Tanneur V, Duranton C, Wieder T,
Huber SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology,Eberhard-Karls-University of Tuebingen, Gmelinstrasse
5, D-72076 Tuebingen, Germany. florian.lang@uni-tuebingen.de

Erythrocytes lack mitochondria and nuclei, key organelles in the regulation of
apoptosis. Until recently, erythrocytes were thus not considered subject to this 
type of cell death. However, exposure of erythrocytes to the Ca2+ ionophore
ionomycin was shown to induce cell shrinkage, cell membrane blebbing and
breakdown of phosphatidylserine asymmetry with subsequent phosphatidylserine
exposure at the cell surface, all typical features of apoptosis. Further studies 
revealed the participation of ion channels in the regulation of erythrocyte
"apoptosis." Osmotic shock, oxidative stress and energy depletion all activate a 
Ca2(+)-permeable non-selective cation channel in the erythrocyte cell membrane.
The subsequent increase of Ca2+ concentration stimulates a scramblase leading to 
breakdown of cell membrane phosphatidylserine asymmetry and activates Ca2+
sensitive K+ (Gardos) channels leading to KCl loss and (further) cell shrinkage. 
Phosphatidylserine exposure and cell shrinkage are blunted in the nominal absence
of extracellular Ca2+, in the presence of the cation channel inhibitors amiloride
or ethylisopropylamiloride, at increased extracellular K+ or in the presence of
the Gardos channel inhibitors clotrimazole or charybdotoxin. Thus, increase of
cytosolic Ca2+ and cellular loss of K+ participate in the triggering of
erythrocyte scramblase. Nevertheless, phosphatidylserine exposure is not
completely abrogated in the nominal absence of Ca2+, pointing to additional
Ca2(+)-independent pathways. One of those is activation of sphingomyelinase with 
subsequent formation of ceramide which in turn leads to stimulation of
erythrocyte scramblase. The exposure of phosphatidylserine at the extracellular
face of the cell membrane stimulates phagocytes to engulf the apoptotic
erythrocytes. Thus, sustained activation of the cation channels eventually leads 
to clearance of affected erythrocytes from peripheral blood. Erythropoietin
inhibits the non-selective cation channel and thus interferes with erythrocyte
"apoptosis." Susceptibility to scramblase activation is enhanced in thalassemia, 
sickle cell disease and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Infection
with Plasmodium falciparum leads to activation of the cation channel eventually
triggering erythrocyte "apoptosis."

DOI: 10.1007/0-387-23752-6_20 
PMID: 18727242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Toxicol Lett. 2005 Jul 4;157(3):175-88. Epub 2005 Apr 7.

Free heme toxicity and its detoxification systems in human.

Kumar S(1), Bandyopadhyay U.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Drug Target Discovery and Development, Central Drug Research
Institute, Chatter Manzil Palace, Mahatma Gandhi Marg, Lucknow 226001, Uttar
Pradesh, India.

Severe hemolysis or myolysis occurring during pathological states, such as sickle
cell disease, ischemia reperfusion, and malaria results in high levels of free
heme, causing undesirable toxicity leading to organ, tissue, and cellular injury.
Free heme catalyzes the oxidation, covalent cross-linking and aggregate formation
of protein and its degradation to small peptides. It also catalyzes the formation
of cytotoxic lipid peroxide via lipid peroxidation and damages DNA through
oxidative stress. Heme being a lipophilic molecule intercalates in the membrane
and impairs lipid bilayers and organelles, such as mitochondria and nuclei, and
destabilizes the cytoskeleton. Heme is a potent hemolytic agent and alters the
conformation of cytoskeletal protein in red cells. Free heme causes endothelial
cell injury, leading to vascular inflammatory disorders and stimulates the
expression of intracellular adhesion molecules. Heme acts as a pro-inflammatory
molecule and heme-induced inflammation is involved in the pathology of diverse
conditions; such as renal failure, arteriosclerosis, and complications after
artificial blood transfusion, peritoneal endometriosis, and heart transplant
failure. Heme offers severe toxic effects to kidney, liver, central nervous
system and cardiac tissue. Although heme oxygenase is primarily responsible to
detoxify free heme but other extra heme oxygenase systems also play a significant
role to detoxify heme. A brief account of free heme toxicity and its
detoxification systems along with mechanistic details are presented.

DOI: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2005.03.004 
PMID: 15917143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Mol Pharmacol. 2004 Oct;66(4):899-908. Epub 2004 Jun 29.

Sodium 4-phenylbutyrate protects against cerebral ischemic injury.

Qi X(1), Hosoi T, Okuma Y, Kaneko M, Nomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Sodium 4-phenylbutyrate (4-PBA) is a low molecular weight fatty acid that has
been used for treatment of urea cycle disorders in children, sickle cell disease,
and thalassemia. It has been demonstrated recently that 4-PBA can act as a
chemical chaperone by reducing the load of mutant or mislocated proteins retained
in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) under conditions associated with cystic
fibrosis and liver injury. In the present study, we evaluated the neuroprotective
effect of 4-PBA on cerebral ischemic injury. Pre- or post-treatment with 4-PBA at
therapeutic doses attenuated infarction volume, hemispheric swelling, and
apoptosis and improved neurological status in a mouse model of hypoxia-ischemia. 
Moreover, 4-PBA suppressed ER-mediated apoptosis by inhibiting eukaryotic
initiation factor 2alpha phosphorylation, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
homologous protein induction, and caspase-12 activation. In neuroblastoma neuro2a
cells, 4-PBA reduced caspase-12 activation, DNA fragmentation, and cell death
induced by hypoxia/reoxygenation. It protected against ER stress-induced but not 
mitochondria-mediated cell death. Additionally, 4-PBA inhibited the expression of
inducible nitric-oxide synthase and tumor necrosis factor-alpha in primary
cultured glial cells under hypoxia/reoxygenation. These results indicate that
4-PBA could protect against cerebral ischemia through inhibition of ER
stress-mediated apoptosis and inflammation. Therefore, the multiple actions of
4-PBA may provide a strong effect in treatment of cerebral ischemia, and its use 
as a chemical chaperone would provide a novel approach for the treatment of
stroke.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.104.001339 
PMID: 15226415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2004 Mar;50(2):117-38.

Band 3 and its alterations in health and disease.

Kay MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Geneva Hospital, Micheli du Crest 24,CH
1211, Geneva, Switzerland. margueritekay@mail.com

Band 3 proteins, members of the anion exchange family of proteins (AE 0-3), are
involved in a number of physiological activities such as cell volume and osmotic 
homeostasis, HCO3-/Cl- exchange, red cell aging, IgG binding and cellular
removal, and the maintenance of the structural integrity of cells. They are
present in the membranes of all cells and cellular organelles examined including 
Golgi, mitochondria and nuclei. The first polymorphisms of band 3 discovered were
the asymptomatic band 3 Memphis variants carrying the Lys --> Gly substitution at
position 56 in the cytoplasmic tail, and band 3 Texas (high transport band 3
Texas) with a mutation in the critical transmembrane, anion transport domain (Pro
--> Leu substitution at position 868). The rate at which band 3 mutations were
discovered accelerated in the mid 1990s and there are now over 50 known. The most
common polymorphisms of band 3 are the Diego blood group antigens which reside on
extracellular loops of the protein. Southeast Asia ovalocytosis (SAO; a nine
amino acid deletion of residues 400-408) is a band 3 mutation known only in the
heterozygous state in which it does not cause disease. It is thought to confer
resistance to malaria by altering red cell deformability. Band 3 mutations are
responsible for a subset of the heterogeneous group of disorders known as
hereditary spherocytosis (HS). HS is a relatively common congenital or inherited 
group of anemias characterized by chronic hemolysis and abnormal red cell
morphology. Red cells in the subset of HS with band 3 mutations behave like they 
are band 3 deficient either because the mutant protein is not incorporated into
the membrane or because it is not functional. HS can be caused by mutations in
any of at least 5 proteins involved in membrane stability. Band 3 mutations are
associated with diseases in cells besides erythrocytes. For example, 2 types of
distal renal tubular acidosis are the result of band 3 mutations either alone or 
combined with SAO. Band 3 alterations are implicated in neurological diseases
such as familial paroxysmal dyskinesia, idiopathic generalized epilepsies, and
neuro- or choreoacanthocytosis although they have not been demonstrated to be
causative. Mutations in other genes can cause changes in band 3. An example is
sickle cell anemia where the increased oxidation causes accelerated aging of band
3 and increased IgG binding and cellular removal.


PMID: 15095783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. EMBO J. 2002 Jul 1;21(13):3327-36.

GH3, a novel proapoptotic domain in Drosophila Grim, promotes a mitochondrial
death pathway.

Clavería C(1), Caminero E, Martínez-A C, Campuzano S, Torres M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Inmunología y Oncología, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología,
CSIC-UAM, Campus de Cantoblanco, E-28049 Madrid, Spain.

Grim encodes a protein required for programmed cell death in Drosophila. The Grim
N-terminus induces apoptosis by disrupting IAP blockage of caspases; however,
N-terminally-deleted Grim retains pro apoptotic activity. We describe GH3, a 15
amino acid internal Grim domain absolutely required for its proapoptotic activity
and sufficient to induce cell death when fused to heterologous carrier proteins. 
A GH3 homology region is present in the Drosophila proapoptotic proteins Reaper
and Sickle. The GH3 domain and the homologous regions in Reaper and Sickle are
predicted to be structured as amphipathic alpha-helixes. During apoptosis
induction, Grim colocalizes with mitochondria and cytochrome c in a GH3-dependent
but N-terminal- and caspase activity-independent manner. When Grim is
overexpressed in vivo, both the N-terminal and the GH3 domains are equally
necessary, and cooperate for apoptosis induction. The N-terminal and GH3 Grim
domains thus activate independent apoptotic pathways that synergize to induce
programmed cell death efficiently.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/cdf354 
PMCID: PMC126101
PMID: 12093734  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Arch Toxicol. 2000 Jan;73(10-11):573-80.

Effects of magnesium deficiency on joint cartilage in immature beagle dogs:
immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy, and mineral concentrations.

Stahlmann R(1), Kühner S, Shakibaei M, Flores J, Vormann J, van Sickle DC.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Abteilung Toxikologie,
Universitätsklinikum Benjamin Franklin, Freie Universität Berlin, Garystr. 5,
14195 Berlin, Germany.

Quinolone-induced chondrotoxicity is possibly associated with the
magnesium-chelating properties of quinolones. This toxic effect seems to be
restricted to a rather short time period during postnatal development as shown in
rats and dogs. We studied developmental changes of the integrin pattern on canine
chondrocytes (e.g. the alpha(v)beta(3)- or alpha(5)beta(1)-integrin), because
integrin function depends on divalent cations, as well as the matrix composition 
(e.g., collagen type II, fibronectin), in 11-, 18-, and 55-week-old Beagles (n=8)
by immunohistochemistry. We also analyzed the magnesium and calcium content by
atomic absorption spectroscopy in cartilage and bone and studied the effects of a
magnesium-deficient diet on joint cartilage in four immature Beagles (18 weeks
old at necropsy). The dogs were fed the magnesium-deficient diet for 40 to 46
days. All dogs exhibited gait alterations ('limping') after 4 weeks on the
magnesium-deficient diet. Male, magnesium-deficient dogs exhibited pronounced
weakness in their front legs; in one of these dogs the front legs were
hyperextended to a 90 degrees angle. We observed no significant differences in
the integrin pattern in samples from dogs at different developmental stages or in
magnesium-deficient dogs in comparison to age-matched controls. Localization of
fibronectin in the joint cartilage was found to vary with the age of the dogs as 
well as with the site of collection. In the middle zone of immature joint
cartilage, corresponding to the predilective site of quinolone-induced cartilage 
lesions, we observed a slight increase in staining with the fibronectin antibody 
in some samples from magnesium-deficient dogs. Electron microscopy revealed
alterations in chondrocytes from the magnesium-deficient dogs (e.g., swollen
mitochondria and enlarged endoplasmic reticulum) which are also seen after
treatment with quinolones. In summary, we found no significant differences of the
integrin pattern on chondrocytes from joint cartilage of dogs at various
developmental stages. However, magnesium deficiency in immature dogs induced
similar clinical symptoms as quinolone treatment as well as distinct alterations 
in chondrocytic fibronectin staining and their ultrastructure. This corroborates 
our findings in rats where magnesium chelation is an important event in
quinolone-induced chondrotoxicity.

DOI: 10.1007/s002040050010 
PMID: 10663389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Arch Toxicol. 2000 Jan;73(10-11):564-72.

Chondrotoxicity of ciprofloxacin in immature beagle dogs: immunohistochemistry,
electron microscopy and drug plasma concentrations.

Stahlmann R(1), Kühner S, Shakibaei M, Schwabe R, Flores J, Evander SA, van
Sickle DC.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Abteilung Toxikologie,
Universitätsklinikum Benjamin Franklin, Freie Universität Berlin, Garystr. 5,
14195 Berlin, Germany.

The systemic effects of ciprofloxacin in immature Beagles were studied. Dogs of
10-11 weeks were dosed orally for 5 days with 0 (n=3), 30 (n=5) and 200 (n=5) mg 
ciprofloxacin/kg body wt. Plasma concentrations were measured by high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) 1 h after dosing (assuming to be peak
concentrations). In view of the high doses used, the plasma concentrations were
rather low and declined during the study period. For example, plasma
concentrations in the high dose group were 6.6 +/- 0.9 mg/l (day 1), 3.9 +/- 1.4 
mg/l (day 3), and 2.6 +/- 1.6 mg/l (day 5). In control dogs and in dogs treated
with the low dose of ciprofloxacin no pathological changes were seen by light
microscopy. However, cleft formation and erosions were observed in joint
cartilage from two of five dogs treated with 200 mg/kg. It is noteworthy that
despite the high dose used cartilage lesions were not detectable in all five dogs
of this group by light microscopy. Using antibodies against cell membrane
receptors (e.g. the alpha(5)beta(1)-integrin) or matrix components (fibronectin, 
collagen II) the articular cartilage effects were studied in detail by
immunohistochemistry. The most sensitive alteration was an increase in
fibronectin which was detectable in the vicinity of the lesions in cartilage
samples from the group of dogs administered the high dose. No clear-cut changes
were seen with the use of antibodies against other matrix components. Electron
microscopy revealed typical alterations in chondrocytes from dogs treated with
ciprofloxacin: e.g., swollen mitochondria and enlarged rough endoplasmic
reticulum. These changes were much more pronounced in dogs from the high dose
group than in dogs from the low dose group. Our main conclusion is that after
oral administration ciprofloxacin exhibits rather low chondrotoxicity, even in
the most sensitive species known to date. This correlates with the findings in
humans that ciprofloxacin seems to be less chondrotoxic than pefloxacin or other 
quinolones.

DOI: 10.1007/s002040050009 
PMID: 10663388  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Arch Dermatol Res. 1978 Sep 28;263(1):47-58.

Effects of 8-methoxypsoralen plus 365 nm UVA light on Candida albicans cells. An 
electron microscopic study.

Scherwitz C, Rassner G, Martin R.

Candida (C) albicans cells were exposed to 8-Methoxypsoralen (8-MOP)
concentrations of 1.0 microgram/ml and 10.0 microgram/ml medium and irradiated
with 365 nm light. The amount of energy emitted was 4.8 J/cm2. Two divergent
types of cell damage occured concerning yeast cell cytoplasm and cell wall. Two
hours after exposure cytoplasmic changes involving mitochondria, which showed
irregularities in shape, blurred appearance or loss of mitochondrial cristae and 
outer membrane were seen. The number of vacuoles was increased. The cytoplasm
showed large electron transparent areas, the cytoplasmic membrane disappeared in 
some areas completely. Nucleus and nuclear envelope usually remained intact in
early stages. 24h after exposure conspicuous cell wall alterations were observed 
in addition to cytoplasmic changes. Newly produced cell wall material formed
ball-like protrusions or was adherent sickle-shaped to the cell wall. The
investigations strongly suggest that the results found after 8-MOP-UVA treatment 
of C. albicans cells can not be interpreted in the sense of a general cytotoxic
effect. Apparently it takes the form of a combination of events involving
regressive and progressive alterations.


PMID: 363068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Arch Dermatol Res. 1978;263(1):47-58.

Effects of 8-methoxypsoralen plus 365 nm UVA light on Candida albicans cells. An 
electron microscopic study.

Scherwitz C, Rassner G, Martin R.

Candida (C.) albicans cells were exposed to 8-Methoxypsoralen (8-MOP)
concentrations of 1.0 microgram/ml and 10.0 micrograms/ml medium and irradiated
with 365 nm light. The amount of energy emitted was 4.8 J/cm2. Two divergent
types of cell damage occured concerning yeast cell cytoplasm and cell wall. Two
hours after exposure cytoplasmic changes involving mitochondria, which showed
irregularities in shape, blurred appearance or loss of mitochondrial cristae and 
outer membrane were seen. The number of vacuoles was increased. The cytoplasm
showed large electron transparent areas, the cytoplasmic membrane disappeared in 
some areas completely. Nucleus and nuclear envelope usually remained intact in
early stages. 24 h after exposure conspicuous cell wall alterations were observed
in addition to cytoplasmic changes. Newly produced cell wall material formed
ball-like protrusions or was adherent sickle-shaped to the cell wall. The
investigations strongly suggest that the results found after 8-MOP-UVA treatment 
of C. albicans cells can not be interpreted in the sense of a general cytotoxic
effect. Apparently it takes the form of a combination of events involving
regressive and progressive alterations.


PMID: 394689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Br J Haematol. 1975 Oct;31(2):135-48.

Ultrastructural studies of the bone marrow in sickle cell anaemia. I. The
structure of sickled erythrocytes and reticulocytes and their phagocytic
destruction.

Grasso JA, Sullivan AL, Sullivan LW.

Marrow aspirates from sickle cell patients were examined without prior
deoxygenation and revealed the presence of a variable proportion (10-30%) of
sickled red cells and reticulocytes. The main feature of sickled red cells was
the presence of 17.6 nm fibres arranged in hexagonal order, and to a lesser
extent in square or rectangular array, to form bundles of varying size and
compactness which occupied the entire cytoplasm. The sickling pattern in
reticulocytes was more variable. Some reticulocytes contained highly-ordered
bundles of 17.6 nm fibres whose structure and distribution was identical to that 
in red cells from whiich they could be distinguished only by their content of
organelles. Many reticulocytes exhibited less-organized fibre patterns ranging
from localized aggregates to poorly-ordered regions of short fibres and filaments
lacking apparent preferential orientation. In these cells, the bulk of the
cytoplasm was not polymerized. Haemoglobin polymerization in reticulocytes led to
entrapment of ribosomes in concentrated foci among the fibres. Frequently,
iron-laden mitochondria were associated with sickled reticulocytes. The variation
in pattern of sickling seen in reticulocytes is attributed to possible
differences in concentration of Hb S. Correlative studies have shown that fibres 
were not induced by fixation procedures. Marked phagocytic degradation of sickled
cells by macrophages was observed. The results are interpreted to indicate the
possible intramedullary phagocytosis of red cells and reticulocytes, predisposed 
to sickling in the marrow. However, the data are also consistent with the removal
of sickled elements from the circulating blood.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.1975.tb00844.x 
PMID: 1201233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Cell Biol. 1969 Dec;43(3):448-55.

Optical diffraction studies of crystalline structures in electron micrographs.
II. Crystalline inclusions in mitochondria of human hepatocytes.

Sternlieb I, Berger JE.

Unit cell dimensions of mitochondrial crystals were determined by optical
diffraction analysis of electron micrographs of human liver biopsy specimens.
Identical unit cells were found in pathologic material obtained from six patients
with Wilson's disease, from one patient with sickle-cell hepatitis, and from two 
normal subjects. These measurements led to the conclusion that the crystals
observed in patients and in normal subjects were probably chemically identical.
Furthermore, the relatively large size of the unit cell limits the choices for
its constituents to phospholipid micelles or to relatively large protein
molecules.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.43.3.448 
PMCID: PMC2107803
PMID: 5351401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc. 1968;66:788-826.

Vascular changes in the bulbar conjunctiva associated with sickle-cell disease:
some observations on fine structure.

Fink AI.


PMCID: PMC1310317
PMID: 5720854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Med Welt. 1967 Dec 16;50:3020-6.

[Significance of disorders of hemoglobin synthesis for the clinical practice].

[Article in German]

Mainzer K.


PMID: 5610824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2020;1131:625-648. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-12457-1_25.

Calcium Channels and Calcium-Regulated Channels in Human Red Blood Cells.

Kaestner L(1)(2), Bogdanova A(3), Egee S(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Theoretical Medicine and Biosciences, Saarland University, Homburg, Germany.
lars_kaestner@me.com.
(2)Experimental Physics, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany.
lars_kaestner@me.com.
(3)Red Blood Cell Research Group, Institute of Veterinary Physiology, Vetsuisse
Faculty and the Zürich Center for Integrative Human Physiology (ZIHP), University
of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(4)CNRS, UMR8227 LBI2M, Sorbonne Université, Roscoff, France.
(5)Laboratoire d'Excellence GR-Ex, Paris, France.

Free Calcium (Ca2+) is an important and universal signalling entity in all cells,
red blood cells included. Although mature mammalian red blood cells are believed 
to not contain organelles as Ca2+ stores such as the endoplasmic reticulum or
mitochondria, a 20,000-fold gradient based on a intracellular Ca2+ concentration 
of approximately 60 nM vs. an extracellular concentration of 1.2 mM makes
Ca2+-permeable channels a major signalling tool of red blood cells. However, the 
internal Ca2+ concentration is tightly controlled, regulated and maintained
primarily by the Ca2+ pumps PMCA1 and PMCA4. Within the last two decades it
became evident that an increased intracellular Ca2+ is associated with red blood 
cell clearance in the spleen and promotes red blood cell aggregability and clot
formation. In contrast to this rather uncontrolled deadly Ca2+ signals only
recently it became evident, that a temporal increase in intracellular Ca2+ can
also have positive effects such as the modulation of the red blood cells O2
binding properties or even be vital for brief transient cellular volume
adaptation when passing constrictions like small capillaries or slits in the
spleen. Here we give an overview of Ca2+ channels and Ca2+-regulated channels in 
red blood cells, namely the Gárdos channel, the non-selective voltage dependent
cation channel, Piezo1, the NMDA receptor, VDAC, TRPC channels, CaV2.1, a
Ca2+-inhibited channel novel to red blood cells and i.a. relate these channels to
the molecular unknown sickle cell disease conductance Psickle. Particular
attention is given to correlation of functional measurements with molecular
entities as well as the physiological and pathophysiological function of these
channels. This view is in constant progress and in particular the understanding
of the interaction of several ion channels in a physiological context just
started. This includes on the one hand channelopathies, where a mutation of the
ion channel is the direct cause of the disease, like Hereditary Xerocytosis and
the Gárdos Channelopathy. On the other hand it applies to red blood cell related 
diseases where an altered channel activity is a secondary effect like in sickle
cell disease or thalassemia. Also these secondary effects should receive medical 
and pharmacologic attention because they can be crucial when it comes to the
life-threatening symptoms of the disease.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-12457-1_25 
PMID: 31646528  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 2019 Jul 1;1865(7):1925-1937. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2018.08.030. Epub 2018 Aug 26.

Role of iron metabolism in heart failure: From iron deficiency to iron overload.

Zhang H(1), Zhabyeyev P(1), Wang S(2), Oudit GY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Canada; Mazankowski Alberta
Heart Institute, Canada.
(2)Mazankowski Alberta Heart Institute, Canada; Division of Cardiac Surgery,
Department of Surgery, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(3)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Canada; Mazankowski Alberta
Heart Institute, Canada. Electronic address: gavin.oudit@ualberta.ca.

Iron metabolism is a balancing act, and biological systems have evolved exquisite
regulatory mechanisms to maintain iron homeostasis. Iron metabolism disorders are
widespread health problems on a global scale and range from iron deficiency to
iron-overload. Both types of iron disorders are linked to heart failure. Iron
play a fundamental role in mitochondrial function and various enzyme functions
and iron deficiency has a particular negative impact on mitochondria function.
Given the high-energy demand of the heart, iron deficiency has a particularly
negative impact on heart function and exacerbates heart failure. Iron-overload
can result from excessive gut absorption of iron or frequent use of blood
transfusions and is typically seen in patients with congenital anemias, sickle
cell anemia and beta-thalassemia major, or in patients with primary
hemochromatosis. This review provides an overview of normal iron metabolism,
mechanisms underlying development of iron disorders in relation to heart failure,
including iron-overload cardiomyopathy, and clinical perspective on the treatment
options for iron metabolism disorders.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2018.08.030 
PMID: 31109456 


3. Redox Biol. 2019 Apr;22:101165. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2019.101165. Epub 2019 Mar
10.

Mitochondria in precision medicine; linking bioenergetics and metabolomics in
platelets.

Chacko BK(1), Smith MR(2), Johnson MS(1), Benavides G(1), Culp ML(1), Pilli J(3),
Shiva S(3), Uppal K(2), Go YM(2), Jones DP(2), Darley-Usmar VM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Mitochondrial Medicine Laboratory, Department of Pathology, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, UK.
(2)Clinical Biomarkers Laboratory, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical
Care Medicine, Emory School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology & Chemical Biology, Vascular Medicine Institute,
Center for Metabolism & Mitochondrial Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(4)Mitochondrial Medicine Laboratory, Department of Pathology, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, UK. Electronic address: vdarleyusmar@uabmc.edu.

Mitochondria possess reserve bioenergetic capacity, supporting protection and
resilience in the face of disease. Approaches are limited to understand factors
that impact mitochondrial functional reserve in humans. We applied the
mitochondrial stress test (MST) to platelets from healthy subjects and found
correlations between energetic parameters and mitochondrial function. These
parameters were not correlated with mitochondrial complex I-IV activities,
however, suggesting that other factors affect mitochondrial bioenergetics and
metabolism. Platelets from African American patients with sickle cell disease
also differed from controls, further showing that other factors impact
mitochondrial bioenergetics and metabolism. To test for correlations of platelet 
metabolites with energetic parameters, we performed an integrated analysis of
metabolomics and MST parameters. Subsets of metabolites, including fatty acids
and xenobiotics correlated with mitochondrial parameters. The results establish
platelets as a platform to integrate bioenergetics and metabolism for analysis of
mitochondrial function in precision medicine.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2019.101165 
PMCID: PMC6436140
PMID: 30877854 


4. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2018 Oct 1;315(4):R840-R847. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00440.2017. Epub 2018 Aug 1.

Potential role of LSD1 inhibitors in the treatment of sickle cell disease: a
review of preclinical animal model data.

Rivers A(1)(2), Jagadeeswaran R(1)(2), Lavelle D(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Illinois at Chicago , Chicago,
Illinois.
(2)Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center , Chicago, Illinois.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago , Chicago, Illinois.

Sickle cell disease (SCD) is caused by a mutation of the β-globin gene (Ingram
VM. Nature 180: 326-328, 1957), which triggers the polymerization of deoxygenated
sickle hemoglobin (HbS). Approximately 100,000 SCD patients in the United States 
and millions worldwide (Piel FB, et al. PLoS Med 10: e1001484, 2013) suffer from 
chronic hemolytic anemia, painful crises, multisystem organ damage, and reduced
life expectancy (Rees DC, et al. Lancet 376: 2018-2031, 2010; Serjeant GR. Cold
Spring Harb Perspect Med 3: a011783, 2013). Hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation can be curative, but the majority of patients do not have a
suitable donor (Talano JA, Cairo MS. Eur J Haematol 94: 391-399, 2015). Advanced 
gene-editing technologies also offer the possibility of a cure (Goodman MA, Malik
P. Ther Adv Hematol 7: 302-315, 2016; Lettre G, Bauer DE. Lancet 387: 2554-2564, 
2016), but the likelihood that these strategies can be mobilized to treat the
large numbers of patients residing in developing countries is remote. A
pharmacological treatment to increase fetal hemoglobin (HbF) as a therapy for SCD
has been a long-sought goal, because increased levels of HbF (α2γ2) inhibit the
polymerization of HbS (Poillin WN, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90: 5039-5043,
1993; Sunshine HR, et al. J Mol Biol 133: 435-467, 1979) and are associated with 
reduced symptoms and increased lifespan of SCD patients (Platt OS, et al. N Engl 
J Med 330: 1639-1644, 1994; Platt OS, et al. N Engl J Med 325: 11-16, 1991). Only
two drugs, hydroxyurea and l-glutamine, are approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration for treatment of SCD. Hydroxyurea is ineffective at HbF induction 
in ~50% of patients (Charache S, et al. N Engl J Med 332: 1317-1322, 1995). While
polymerization of HbS has been traditionally considered the driving force in the 
hemolysis of SCD, the excessive reactive oxygen species generated from red blood 
cells, with further amplification by intravascular hemolysis, also are a major
contributor to SCD pathology. This review highlights a new class of drugs,
lysine-specific demethylase (LSD1) inhibitors, that induce HbF and reduce
reactive oxygen species.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpregu.00440.2017 
PMCID: PMC6734057
PMID: 30067082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biol Chem. 2018 Jun 15;293(24):9248-9264. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA117.000834. Epub
2018 May 3.

Deletion of ferroportin in murine myeloid cells increases iron accumulation and
stimulates osteoclastogenesis in vitro and in vivo.

Wang L(1)(2), Fang B(2)(3), Fujiwara T(2), Krager K(4), Gorantla A(4), Li C(5),
Feng JQ(5), Jennings ML(6), Zhou J(7), Aykin-Burns N(8), Zhao H(9)(6)(10)(11).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Orthopedics, First Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, Anhui 230022, China.
(2)the Center for Osteoporosis and Metabolic Bone Diseases, Division of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine.
(3)the Department of Hematology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, China.
(4)Division of Radiation Health, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, and.
(5)the Department of Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M College of Dentistry, Dallas,
Texas 75246.
(6)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas 72205.
(7)From the Department of Orthopedics, First Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, Anhui 230022, China, zhoujian831207@163.com.
(8)Division of Radiation Health, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, and
NAykinburns@uams.edu.
(9)the Center for Osteoporosis and Metabolic Bone Diseases, Division of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, hzhao@uams.edu.
(10)the Research Department, Tibor Rubin Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Veterans Affairs Long Beach Healthcare System, Long Beach, California 90822, and.
(11)the Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University of
California at Irvine, Irvine, California 92697.

Osteoporosis, osteopenia, and pathological bone fractures are frequent
complications of iron-overload conditions such as hereditary hemochromatosis,
thalassemia, and sickle cell disease. Moreover, animal models of iron overload
have revealed increased bone resorption and decreased bone formation. Although
systemic iron overload affects multiple organs and tissues, leading to
significant changes on bone modeling and remodeling, the cell autonomous effects 
of excessive iron on bone cells remain unknown. Here, to elucidate the role of
cellular iron homeostasis in osteoclasts, we generated two mouse strains in which
solute carrier family 40 member 1 (Slc40a1), a gene encoding ferroportin (FPN),
the sole iron exporter in mammalian cells, was specifically deleted in myeloid
osteoclast precursors or mature cells. The FPN deletion mildly increased iron
levels in both precursor and mature osteoclasts, and its loss in precursors, but 
not in mature cells, increased osteoclastogenesis and decreased bone mass in vivo
Of note, these phenotypes were more pronounced in female than in male mice. In
vitro studies revealed that the elevated intracellular iron promoted macrophage
proliferation and amplified expression of nuclear factor of activated T cells 1
(Nfatc1) and PPARG coactivator 1β (Pgc-1β), two transcription factors critical
for osteoclast differentiation. However, the iron excess did not affect
osteoclast survival. While increased iron stimulated global mitochondrial
metabolism in osteoclast precursors, it had little influence on mitochondrial
mass and reactive oxygen species production. These results indicate that
FPN-regulated intracellular iron levels are critical for mitochondrial
metabolism, osteoclastogenesis, and skeletal homeostasis in mice.

© 2018 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA117.000834 
PMCID: PMC6005439
PMID: 29724825  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Heart Fail Rev. 2018 Sep;23(5):801-816. doi: 10.1007/s10741-018-9700-5.

Involvement of cytosolic and mitochondrial iron in iron overload cardiomyopathy: 
an update.

Gordan R(1), Wongjaikam S(2)(3)(4), Gwathmey JK(1)(5), Chattipakorn N(2)(3)(4),
Chattipakorn SC(2)(4)(6), Xie LH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, Rutgers University-New
Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey, 07103, USA.
(2)Cardiac Electrophysiology Research and Training Center, Faculty of Medicine,
Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(3)Cardiac Electrophysiology Unit, Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine,
Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(4)Center of Excellence in Cardiac Electrophysiology Research, Chiang Mai
University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(5)Gwathmey Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Department of Oral Biology and Diagnostic Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry,
Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(7)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, Rutgers University-New
Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey, 07103, USA. xiela@njms.rutgers.edu.

Iron overload cardiomyopathy (IOC) is a major cause of death in patients with
diseases associated with chronic anemia such as thalassemia or sickle cell
disease after chronic blood transfusions. Associated with iron overload
conditions, there is excess free iron that enters cardiomyocytes through both L- 
and T-type calcium channels thereby resulting in increased reactive oxygen
species being generated via Haber-Weiss and Fenton reactions. It is thought that 
an increase in reactive oxygen species contributes to high morbidity and
mortality rates. Recent studies have, however, suggested that it is iron overload
in mitochondria that contributes to cellular oxidative stress, mitochondrial
damage, cardiac arrhythmias, as well as the development of cardiomyopathy. Iron
chelators, antioxidants, and/or calcium channel blockers have been demonstrated
to prevent and ameliorate cardiac dysfunction in animal models as well as in
patients suffering from cardiac iron overload. Hence, either a mono-therapy or
combination therapies with any of the aforementioned agents may serve as a novel 
treatment in iron-overload patients in the near future. In the present article,
we review the mechanisms of cytosolic and/or mitochondrial iron load in the heart
which may contribute synergistically or independently to the development of
iron-associated cardiomyopathy. We also review available as well as potential
future novel treatments.

DOI: 10.1007/s10741-018-9700-5 
PMCID: PMC6093778
PMID: 29675595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Front Physiol. 2017 Dec 19;8:1082. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.01082. eCollection
2017.

Oxidized Mutant Human Hemoglobins S and E Induce Oxidative Stress and
Bioenergetic Dysfunction in Human Pulmonary Endothelial Cells.

Jana S(1), Meng F(1), Hirsch RE(2), Friedman JM(3), Alayash AI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Vascular Biology, Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD, United 
States.
(2)Hematology Division, Department of Medicine and Department of Anatomy and
Structural Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, United
States.
(3)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Bronx, NY, United States.

Cell free hemoglobin (Hb), becomes oxidized in the circulation during hemolytic
episodes in sickle cell disease (SCD) or thalassemia and may potentially cause
major complications that are damaging to the vascular system. Hemolytic anemias
are commonly associated with pulmonary hypertension (PH) and often result from
dysfunction of lung endothelial cells. The aim of this study was to determine the
effect of different Hbs on cultured human lung endothelial function. Toward this 
goal, endothelial permeability, oxidative stress response parameters, glycolytic 
and mitochondrial bioenergetic functions were monitored in cultured human
pulmonary arterial endothelial cells (HPAEC) following incubation with human
adult Hb (HbA), and Hb isolated from patients with sickle cell Hb (HbS, βV6E) and
HbE (βE26K) that commonly co-exist with β-thalassemia. These mutant Hbs are known
for their distinct oxidative profiles. HPAEC treated with the ferrous forms of
HbE, HbS for 24 h showed higher loss of endothelial monolayer integrity with
concomitant rise in reactive oxygen radical production, lipid hydroperoxide
formation and higher expressions of oxidative stress response proteins including 
heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) accompanied by a rise in uncoupled mitochondrial
respiration. Loss of membrane permeability was diminished in part by haptoglobin 
(Hp, protein scavenger), hemopexin (Hpx, heme scavenger) or ascorbate (reducing
agent). To understand the role of Hb oxidation, HPAEC were exposed to ferric or
ferryl states of the mutant Hbs. Ferryl forms of all proteins caused a
significant damage to the endothelial monolayer integrity at a higher degree than
their respective ferric Hbs. Ferryl forms of HbS and HbE also caused a loss of
respiratory chain complex activities in isolated endothelial mitochondria and
basal oxygen consumption in HPAEC. However, longer incubation with ferryl Hbs
produced bioenergetic reprogramming including higher degree of uncoupled
respiration and glycolytic rate. The data in this report collectively indicate
that higher oxidation forms of HbS and HbE cause endothelial dysfunction through 
distinct damaging mechanisms involving mitochondrial bioenergetic function.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2017.01082 
PMCID: PMC5742253
PMID: 29311995 


8. Thromb Haemost. 2017 Oct 5;117(10):1859-1867. doi: 10.1160/TH17-03-0174. Epub
2017 Aug 3.

Superoxide Dismutase 2 is dispensable for platelet function.

Fidler TP, Rowley JW, Araujo C, Boudreau LH, Marti A, Souvenir R, Dale K, Boilard
E, Weyrich AS, Abel ED(1).

Author information: 
(1)E. Dale Abel, MB.BS., DPhil., Fraternal Order of Eagles Diabetes Research
Center, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver
College of Medicine, University of Iowa, 4312 PBDB, 169 Newton Road, Iowa City,
IA 52242-1101, USA, Tel.: +1 (319) 353 3050, Fax: +1 (319) 335 3865, E-mail:
DRCadmin@uiowa.edu.

Increased intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) promote platelet
activation. The sources of platelet-derived ROS are diverse and whether or not
mitochondrial derived ROS, modulates platelet function is incompletely
understood. Studies of platelets from patients with sickle cell disease, and
diabetes suggest a correlation between mitochondrial ROS and platelet
dysfunction. Therefore, we generated mice with a platelet specific knockout of
superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2-KO) to determine if increased mitochondrial ROS
increases platelet activation. SOD2-KO platelets demonstrated decreased SOD2
activity and increased mitochondrial ROS, however total platelet ROS was
unchanged. Mitochondrial function and content were maintained in non-stimulated
platelets. However SOD2-KO platelets demonstrated decreased mitochondrial
function following thrombin stimulation. In vitro platelet activation and
spreading was normal and in vivo, deletion of SOD2 did not change tail-bleeding
or arterial thrombosis indices. In pathophysiological models mediated by
platelet-dependent immune mechanisms such as sepsis and autoimmune inflammatory
arthritis, SOD2-KO mice were phenotypically identical to wildtype controls. These
data demonstrate that increased mitochondrial ROS does not result in platelet
dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1160/TH17-03-0174 
PMCID: PMC5894334
PMID: 28771279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Exp Hematol. 2017 Jun;50:46-52. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2017.02.003. Epub 2017 Feb 
24.

Pharmacological inhibition of LSD1 and mTOR reduces mitochondrial retention and
associated ROS levels in the red blood cells of sickle cell disease.

Jagadeeswaran R(1), Vazquez BA(2), Thiruppathi M(3), Ganesh BB(4), Ibanez V(5),
Cui S(6), Engel JD(7), Diamond AM(8), Molokie RE(5), DeSimone J(5), Lavelle D(5),
Rivers A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA;
Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Research Resources Center, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL,
USA.
(5)Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA; Department of
Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA.
(8)Department of Pathology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA;
Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA. Electronic
address: riversa@uic.edu.

Sickle cell disease (SCD), an inherited blood disorder caused by a point mutation
that renders hemoglobin susceptible to polymerization when deoxygenated, affects 
millions of people worldwide. Manifestations of SCD include chronic hemolytic
anemia, inflammation, painful vaso-occlusive crises, multisystem organ damage,
and reduced life expectancy. Part of SCD pathophysiology is the excessive
formation of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) in SCD red blood cells
(RBCs), which accelerates their hemolysis. Normal RBC precursors eliminate their 
mitochondria during the terminal differentiation process. Strikingly, we observed
an increased percentage of RBCs retaining mitochondria in SCD patient blood
samples compared with healthy individuals. In addition, using an experimental SCD
mouse model, we demonstrate that excessive levels of ROS in SCD are associated
with this abnormal mitochondrial retention. Interestingly, the LSD1 inhibitor,
RN-1, and the mitophagy-inducing agent mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
inhibitor, sirolimus, increased RBC lifespan and reduced ROS accumulation in
parallel with reducing mitochondria-retaining RBCs in the SCD mouse model.
Furthermore, gene expression analysis of SCD mice treated with RN-1 showed
increased expression of mitophagy genes. Our findings suggest that reduction of
mitochondria-retaining RBCs may provide a new therapeutic approach to preventing 
excessive ROS in SCD.

Copyright © 2017 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exphem.2017.02.003 
PMCID: PMC6263958
PMID: 28238805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biol Chem. 2015 Nov 13;290(46):27939-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.651257. Epub
2015 Sep 22.

Sickle Cell Hemoglobin in the Ferryl State Promotes βCys-93 Oxidation and
Mitochondrial Dysfunction in Epithelial Lung Cells (E10).

Kassa T(1), Jana S(1), Strader MB(1), Meng F(1), Jia Y(1), Wilson MT(2), Alayash 
AI(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Laboratory of Biochemistry and Vascular Biology, Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland
20993 and.
(2)the Department of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park,
Colchester CO4 3SQ, United Kingdom.
(3)From the Laboratory of Biochemistry and Vascular Biology, Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland
20993 and abdu.alayash@fda.hhs.gov.

Polymerization of intraerythrocytic deoxyhemoglobin S (HbS) is the primary
molecular event that leads to hemolytic anemia in sickle cell disease (SCD). We
reasoned that HbS may contribute to the complex pathophysiology of SCD in part
due to its pseudoperoxidase activity. We compared oxidation reactions and the
turnover of oxidation intermediates of purified human HbS and HbA. Hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2) drives a catalytic cycle that includes the following three
distinct steps: 1) initial oxidation of ferrous (oxy) to ferryl Hb; 2)
autoreduction of the ferryl intermediate to ferric (metHb); and 3) reaction of
metHb with an additional H2O2 molecule to regenerate the ferryl intermediate.
Ferrous and ferric forms of both proteins underwent initial oxidation to the
ferryl heme in the presence of H2O2 at equal rates. However, the rate of
autoreduction of ferryl to the ferric form was slower in the HbS solutions. Using
quantitative mass spectrometry and the spin trap,
5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide, we found more irreversibly oxidized βCys-93in
HbS than in HbA. Incubation of the ferric or ferryl HbS with cultured lung
epithelial cells (E10) induced a drop in mitochondrial oxygen consumption rate
and impairment of cellular bioenergetics that was related to the redox state of
the iron. Ferryl HbS induced a substantial drop in the mitochondrial
transmembrane potential and increases in cytosolic heme oxygenase (HO-1)
expression and mitochondrial colocalization in E10 cells. Thus, highly oxidizing 
ferryl Hb and heme, the product of oxidation, may be central to the evolution of 
vasculopathy in SCD and may suggest therapeutic modalities that interrupt
heme-mediated inflammation.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.651257 
PMCID: PMC4646035
PMID: 26396189  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mitochondrial DNA A DNA Mapp Seq Anal. 2016 Sep;27(5):3481-2. doi:
10.3109/19401736.2015.1066358. Epub 2015 Aug 10.

Characterization of the complete mitochondrial genome of Sickle pomfret
Taractichthys steindachneri (Perciformes: Bramidae).

Li W(1), Tian S(1)(2)(3), Zhu J(1)(2)(3), Wu F(1)(2)(3), Wang K(1), Dai
X(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a College of Marine Sciences, Shanghai Ocean University , Shanghai , P.R.
China .
(2)b National Engineering Research Center for Oceanic Fisheries , Shanghai ,
China , and.
(3)c Scientific Observing and Experimental Station of Oceanic Fisheries Resources
and Environment, Ministry of Agriculture , Shanghai , P.R. China.

The complete mitogenome sequence of Taractichthys steindachneri was sequenced and
analyzed in this study. The complete mitogenome of T. steindachneri is 16 723 bp 
in length, which contains 22 transfer RNAs, 2 ribosomal RNAs, 13 protein-coding
genes and 2 non-coding region, a rep region and a control region (D-loop). This
study will be useful for studying on the molecular systematic, taxonomic status
and conservation genetics.

DOI: 10.3109/19401736.2015.1066358 
PMID: 26258504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS One. 2015 May 29;10(5):e0128694. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128694.
eCollection 2015.

Mechanism of testosterone deficiency in the transgenic sickle cell mouse.

Musicki B(1), Zhang Y(1), Chen H(2), Brown TR(2), Zirkin BR(2), Burnett AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute and Department of Urology, The
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Johns Hopkins Bloomberg 
School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Testosterone deficiency is associated with sickle cell disease (SCD), but its
underlying mechanism is not known. We investigated the possible occurrence and
mechanism of testosterone deficiency in a mouse model of human SCD. Transgenic
sickle male mice (Sickle) exhibited decreased serum and intratesticular
testosterone and increased luteinizing hormone (LH) levels compared with wild
type (WT) mice, indicating primary hypogonadism in Sickle mice. LH-, dbcAMP-, and
pregnenolone- (but not 22-hydroxycholesterol)- stimulated testosterone production
by Leydig cells isolated from the Sickle mouse testis was decreased compared to
that of WT mice, implying defective Leydig cell steroidogenesis. There also was
reduced protein expression of steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (STAR), but 
not cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc), in the Sickle mouse testis.
These data suggest that the capacity of P450scc to support testosterone
production may be limited by the supply of cholesterol to the mitochondria in
Sickle mice. The sickle mouse testis exhibited upregulated NADPH oxidase subunit 
gp91phox and increased oxidative stress, measured as 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal, and
unchanged protein expression of an antioxidant glutathione peroxidase-1. Mice
heterozygous for the human sickle globin (Hemi) exhibited intermediate
hypogonadal changes between those of WT and Sickle mice. These results
demonstrate that testosterone deficiency occurs in Sickle mice, mimicking the
human condition. The defects in the Leydig cell steroidogenic pathway in Sickle
mice, mainly due to reduced availability of cholesterol for testosterone
production, may be related to NADPH oxidase-derived oxidative stress. Our
findings suggest that targeting testicular oxidative stress or steroidogenesis
mechanisms in SCD offers a potential treatment for improving phenotypic changes
associated with testosterone deficiency in this disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128694 
PMCID: PMC4449127
PMID: 26023917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Sep 30;111(39):E4110-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1405023111. Epub 2014 Sep 15.

Hemolysis-induced lethality involves inflammasome activation by heme.

Dutra FF(1), Alves LS(1), Rodrigues D(1), Fernandez PL(2), de Oliveira RB(3),
Golenbock DT(3), Zamboni DS(4), Bozza MT(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Inflamação e Imunidade, Departamento de Imunologia, Instituto
de Microbiologia, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, 21941-902, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil;
(2)Centro de Biología Celular y Molecular de Enfermedades, Instituto de
Investigaciones Científicas y Servicios de Alta Tecnología, 0843-01103, Panama
City, Panama;
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605; and.
(4)Departamento de Biologia Celular, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto,
Universidade de São Paulo, 14049-900, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Laboratório de Inflamação e Imunidade, Departamento de Imunologia, Instituto
de Microbiologia, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, 21941-902, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil; mbozza@micro.ufrj.br.

The increase of extracellular heme is a hallmark of hemolysis or extensive cell
damage. Heme has prooxidant, cytotoxic, and inflammatory effects, playing a
central role in the pathogenesis of malaria, sepsis, and sickle cell disease.
However, the mechanisms by which heme is sensed by innate immune cells
contributing to these diseases are not fully characterized. We found that heme,
but not porphyrins without iron, activated LPS-primed macrophages promoting the
processing of IL-1β dependent on nucleotide-binding domain and leucine rich
repeat containing family, pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3). The activation of
NLRP3 by heme required spleen tyrosine kinase, NADPH oxidase-2, mitochondrial
reactive oxygen species, and K(+) efflux, whereas it was independent of heme
internalization, lysosomal damage, ATP release, the purinergic receptor P2X7, and
cell death. Importantly, our results indicated the participation of macrophages, 
NLRP3 inflammasome components, and IL-1R in the lethality caused by sterile
hemolysis. Thus, understanding the molecular pathways affected by heme in innate 
immune cells might prove useful to identify new therapeutic targets for diseases 
that have heme release.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1405023111 
PMCID: PMC4191786
PMID: 25225402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Blood. 2014 May 1;123(18):2864-72. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-09-529420. Epub 2014
Mar 27.

Platelet bioenergetic screen in sickle cell patients reveals mitochondrial
complex V inhibition, which contributes to platelet activation.

Cardenes N(1), Corey C, Geary L, Jain S, Zharikov S, Barge S, Novelli EM, Shiva
S.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Medicine Institute and.

Bioenergetic dysfunction, although central to the pathogenesis of numerous
diseases, remains uncharacterized in many patient populations because of the
invasiveness of obtaining tissue for mitochondrial studies. Although platelets
are an accessible source of mitochondria, the role of bioenergetics in regulating
platelet function remains unclear. Herein, we validate extracellular flux
analysis in human platelets and use this technique to screen for mitochondrial
dysfunction in sickle cell disease (SCD) patients, a population with aberrant
platelet activation of an unknown mechanism and in which mitochondrial function
has never been assessed. We identify a bioenergetic alteration in SCD patients
characterized by deficient complex V activity, leading to decreased mitochondrial
respiration, membrane hyperpolarization, and augmented oxidant production
compared with healthy subjects. This dysfunction correlates with platelet
activation and hemolysis in vivo and can be recapitulated in vitro by exposing
healthy platelets to hemoglobin or a complex V inhibitor. Further, reproduction
of this dysfunction in vitro activates healthy platelets, an effect prevented by 
attenuation of mitochondrial hyperpolarization or by scavenging mitochondrial
oxidants. These data identify bioenergetic dysfunction in SCD patients for the
first time and establish mitochondrial hyperpolarization and oxidant generation
as potential pathogenic mechanism in SCD as well as a modulator of healthy
platelet function.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2013-09-529420 
PMCID: PMC4007612
PMID: 24677541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Transfusion. 2013 Feb;53(2):424-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2012.03774.x. Epub
2012 Jul 15.

Oxygen: the poison is in the dose.

Winslow RM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, USA.

Cell-free hemoglobin (Hb) has been blamed for a spectrum of problems, including
vasoconstriction pancreatitis, myocardial infarction, and pulmonary hypertension 
in hemolytic anemia, malaria, and sickle cell anemia, and from Hb-based oxygen
carriers (HBOCs). Toxicities have been attributed to scavenging of nitric oxide
(NO). However, while NO scavenging may explain many in vitro effects, and some
effects in animal models and clinical trials with HBOCs, key inconsistencies in
the theory require alternative explanations. This review considers the hypothesis
that cell-free Hb oversupplies oxygen to tissues, leading to oxygen-related
toxicity, possibly through formation of reactive oxygen species and local
destruction of NO. Evidence for this hypothesis comes from various sources,
establishing that tissue oxygen levels are maintained over very narrow (and low) 
levels, even at high oxygen consumption. Tissue is normally protected from
excessive oxygen by its extremely low solubility in plasma, but introduction of
cell-free Hb, even at low concentration, greatly augments oxygen supply, engaging
protective mechanisms that include vasoconstriction and ischemia. The requirement
to limit oxygen supply by cell-free Hb suggests novel ways to modify it to
overcome vasoconstriction, independent of the intrinsic reaction of Hb with NO.
This control is essential to the design of a safe and effective cell-free HBOC.

© 2012 American Association of Blood Banks.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2012.03774.x 
PMID: 22804568  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2004;559:211-7.

Erythrocyte ion channels in regulation of apoptosis.

Lang F(1), Birka C, Myssina S, Lang KS, Lang PA, Tanneur V, Duranton C, Wieder T,
Huber SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology,Eberhard-Karls-University of Tuebingen, Gmelinstrasse
5, D-72076 Tuebingen, Germany. florian.lang@uni-tuebingen.de

Erythrocytes lack mitochondria and nuclei, key organelles in the regulation of
apoptosis. Until recently, erythrocytes were thus not considered subject to this 
type of cell death. However, exposure of erythrocytes to the Ca2+ ionophore
ionomycin was shown to induce cell shrinkage, cell membrane blebbing and
breakdown of phosphatidylserine asymmetry with subsequent phosphatidylserine
exposure at the cell surface, all typical features of apoptosis. Further studies 
revealed the participation of ion channels in the regulation of erythrocyte
"apoptosis." Osmotic shock, oxidative stress and energy depletion all activate a 
Ca2(+)-permeable non-selective cation channel in the erythrocyte cell membrane.
The subsequent increase of Ca2+ concentration stimulates a scramblase leading to 
breakdown of cell membrane phosphatidylserine asymmetry and activates Ca2+
sensitive K+ (Gardos) channels leading to KCl loss and (further) cell shrinkage. 
Phosphatidylserine exposure and cell shrinkage are blunted in the nominal absence
of extracellular Ca2+, in the presence of the cation channel inhibitors amiloride
or ethylisopropylamiloride, at increased extracellular K+ or in the presence of
the Gardos channel inhibitors clotrimazole or charybdotoxin. Thus, increase of
cytosolic Ca2+ and cellular loss of K+ participate in the triggering of
erythrocyte scramblase. Nevertheless, phosphatidylserine exposure is not
completely abrogated in the nominal absence of Ca2+, pointing to additional
Ca2(+)-independent pathways. One of those is activation of sphingomyelinase with 
subsequent formation of ceramide which in turn leads to stimulation of
erythrocyte scramblase. The exposure of phosphatidylserine at the extracellular
face of the cell membrane stimulates phagocytes to engulf the apoptotic
erythrocytes. Thus, sustained activation of the cation channels eventually leads 
to clearance of affected erythrocytes from peripheral blood. Erythropoietin
inhibits the non-selective cation channel and thus interferes with erythrocyte
"apoptosis." Susceptibility to scramblase activation is enhanced in thalassemia, 
sickle cell disease and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Infection
with Plasmodium falciparum leads to activation of the cation channel eventually
triggering erythrocyte "apoptosis."

DOI: 10.1007/0-387-23752-6_20 
PMID: 18727242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Toxicol Lett. 2005 Jul 4;157(3):175-88. Epub 2005 Apr 7.

Free heme toxicity and its detoxification systems in human.

Kumar S(1), Bandyopadhyay U.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Drug Target Discovery and Development, Central Drug Research
Institute, Chatter Manzil Palace, Mahatma Gandhi Marg, Lucknow 226001, Uttar
Pradesh, India.

Severe hemolysis or myolysis occurring during pathological states, such as sickle
cell disease, ischemia reperfusion, and malaria results in high levels of free
heme, causing undesirable toxicity leading to organ, tissue, and cellular injury.
Free heme catalyzes the oxidation, covalent cross-linking and aggregate formation
of protein and its degradation to small peptides. It also catalyzes the formation
of cytotoxic lipid peroxide via lipid peroxidation and damages DNA through
oxidative stress. Heme being a lipophilic molecule intercalates in the membrane
and impairs lipid bilayers and organelles, such as mitochondria and nuclei, and
destabilizes the cytoskeleton. Heme is a potent hemolytic agent and alters the
conformation of cytoskeletal protein in red cells. Free heme causes endothelial
cell injury, leading to vascular inflammatory disorders and stimulates the
expression of intracellular adhesion molecules. Heme acts as a pro-inflammatory
molecule and heme-induced inflammation is involved in the pathology of diverse
conditions; such as renal failure, arteriosclerosis, and complications after
artificial blood transfusion, peritoneal endometriosis, and heart transplant
failure. Heme offers severe toxic effects to kidney, liver, central nervous
system and cardiac tissue. Although heme oxygenase is primarily responsible to
detoxify free heme but other extra heme oxygenase systems also play a significant
role to detoxify heme. A brief account of free heme toxicity and its
detoxification systems along with mechanistic details are presented.

DOI: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2005.03.004 
PMID: 15917143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Mol Pharmacol. 2004 Oct;66(4):899-908. Epub 2004 Jun 29.

Sodium 4-phenylbutyrate protects against cerebral ischemic injury.

Qi X(1), Hosoi T, Okuma Y, Kaneko M, Nomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Sodium 4-phenylbutyrate (4-PBA) is a low molecular weight fatty acid that has
been used for treatment of urea cycle disorders in children, sickle cell disease,
and thalassemia. It has been demonstrated recently that 4-PBA can act as a
chemical chaperone by reducing the load of mutant or mislocated proteins retained
in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) under conditions associated with cystic
fibrosis and liver injury. In the present study, we evaluated the neuroprotective
effect of 4-PBA on cerebral ischemic injury. Pre- or post-treatment with 4-PBA at
therapeutic doses attenuated infarction volume, hemispheric swelling, and
apoptosis and improved neurological status in a mouse model of hypoxia-ischemia. 
Moreover, 4-PBA suppressed ER-mediated apoptosis by inhibiting eukaryotic
initiation factor 2alpha phosphorylation, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
homologous protein induction, and caspase-12 activation. In neuroblastoma neuro2a
cells, 4-PBA reduced caspase-12 activation, DNA fragmentation, and cell death
induced by hypoxia/reoxygenation. It protected against ER stress-induced but not 
mitochondria-mediated cell death. Additionally, 4-PBA inhibited the expression of
inducible nitric-oxide synthase and tumor necrosis factor-alpha in primary
cultured glial cells under hypoxia/reoxygenation. These results indicate that
4-PBA could protect against cerebral ischemia through inhibition of ER
stress-mediated apoptosis and inflammation. Therefore, the multiple actions of
4-PBA may provide a strong effect in treatment of cerebral ischemia, and its use 
as a chemical chaperone would provide a novel approach for the treatment of
stroke.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.104.001339 
PMID: 15226415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2004 Mar;50(2):117-38.

Band 3 and its alterations in health and disease.

Kay MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Geneva Hospital, Micheli du Crest 24,CH
1211, Geneva, Switzerland. margueritekay@mail.com

Band 3 proteins, members of the anion exchange family of proteins (AE 0-3), are
involved in a number of physiological activities such as cell volume and osmotic 
homeostasis, HCO3-/Cl- exchange, red cell aging, IgG binding and cellular
removal, and the maintenance of the structural integrity of cells. They are
present in the membranes of all cells and cellular organelles examined including 
Golgi, mitochondria and nuclei. The first polymorphisms of band 3 discovered were
the asymptomatic band 3 Memphis variants carrying the Lys --> Gly substitution at
position 56 in the cytoplasmic tail, and band 3 Texas (high transport band 3
Texas) with a mutation in the critical transmembrane, anion transport domain (Pro
--> Leu substitution at position 868). The rate at which band 3 mutations were
discovered accelerated in the mid 1990s and there are now over 50 known. The most
common polymorphisms of band 3 are the Diego blood group antigens which reside on
extracellular loops of the protein. Southeast Asia ovalocytosis (SAO; a nine
amino acid deletion of residues 400-408) is a band 3 mutation known only in the
heterozygous state in which it does not cause disease. It is thought to confer
resistance to malaria by altering red cell deformability. Band 3 mutations are
responsible for a subset of the heterogeneous group of disorders known as
hereditary spherocytosis (HS). HS is a relatively common congenital or inherited 
group of anemias characterized by chronic hemolysis and abnormal red cell
morphology. Red cells in the subset of HS with band 3 mutations behave like they 
are band 3 deficient either because the mutant protein is not incorporated into
the membrane or because it is not functional. HS can be caused by mutations in
any of at least 5 proteins involved in membrane stability. Band 3 mutations are
associated with diseases in cells besides erythrocytes. For example, 2 types of
distal renal tubular acidosis are the result of band 3 mutations either alone or 
combined with SAO. Band 3 alterations are implicated in neurological diseases
such as familial paroxysmal dyskinesia, idiopathic generalized epilepsies, and
neuro- or choreoacanthocytosis although they have not been demonstrated to be
causative. Mutations in other genes can cause changes in band 3. An example is
sickle cell anemia where the increased oxidation causes accelerated aging of band
3 and increased IgG binding and cellular removal.


PMID: 15095783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. EMBO J. 2002 Jul 1;21(13):3327-36.

GH3, a novel proapoptotic domain in Drosophila Grim, promotes a mitochondrial
death pathway.

Clavería C(1), Caminero E, Martínez-A C, Campuzano S, Torres M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Inmunología y Oncología, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología,
CSIC-UAM, Campus de Cantoblanco, E-28049 Madrid, Spain.

Grim encodes a protein required for programmed cell death in Drosophila. The Grim
N-terminus induces apoptosis by disrupting IAP blockage of caspases; however,
N-terminally-deleted Grim retains pro apoptotic activity. We describe GH3, a 15
amino acid internal Grim domain absolutely required for its proapoptotic activity
and sufficient to induce cell death when fused to heterologous carrier proteins. 
A GH3 homology region is present in the Drosophila proapoptotic proteins Reaper
and Sickle. The GH3 domain and the homologous regions in Reaper and Sickle are
predicted to be structured as amphipathic alpha-helixes. During apoptosis
induction, Grim colocalizes with mitochondria and cytochrome c in a GH3-dependent
but N-terminal- and caspase activity-independent manner. When Grim is
overexpressed in vivo, both the N-terminal and the GH3 domains are equally
necessary, and cooperate for apoptosis induction. The N-terminal and GH3 Grim
domains thus activate independent apoptotic pathways that synergize to induce
programmed cell death efficiently.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/cdf354 
PMCID: PMC126101
PMID: 12093734  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Arch Toxicol. 2000 Jan;73(10-11):573-80.

Effects of magnesium deficiency on joint cartilage in immature beagle dogs:
immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy, and mineral concentrations.

Stahlmann R(1), Kühner S, Shakibaei M, Flores J, Vormann J, van Sickle DC.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Abteilung Toxikologie,
Universitätsklinikum Benjamin Franklin, Freie Universität Berlin, Garystr. 5,
14195 Berlin, Germany.

Quinolone-induced chondrotoxicity is possibly associated with the
magnesium-chelating properties of quinolones. This toxic effect seems to be
restricted to a rather short time period during postnatal development as shown in
rats and dogs. We studied developmental changes of the integrin pattern on canine
chondrocytes (e.g. the alpha(v)beta(3)- or alpha(5)beta(1)-integrin), because
integrin function depends on divalent cations, as well as the matrix composition 
(e.g., collagen type II, fibronectin), in 11-, 18-, and 55-week-old Beagles (n=8)
by immunohistochemistry. We also analyzed the magnesium and calcium content by
atomic absorption spectroscopy in cartilage and bone and studied the effects of a
magnesium-deficient diet on joint cartilage in four immature Beagles (18 weeks
old at necropsy). The dogs were fed the magnesium-deficient diet for 40 to 46
days. All dogs exhibited gait alterations ('limping') after 4 weeks on the
magnesium-deficient diet. Male, magnesium-deficient dogs exhibited pronounced
weakness in their front legs; in one of these dogs the front legs were
hyperextended to a 90 degrees angle. We observed no significant differences in
the integrin pattern in samples from dogs at different developmental stages or in
magnesium-deficient dogs in comparison to age-matched controls. Localization of
fibronectin in the joint cartilage was found to vary with the age of the dogs as 
well as with the site of collection. In the middle zone of immature joint
cartilage, corresponding to the predilective site of quinolone-induced cartilage 
lesions, we observed a slight increase in staining with the fibronectin antibody 
in some samples from magnesium-deficient dogs. Electron microscopy revealed
alterations in chondrocytes from the magnesium-deficient dogs (e.g., swollen
mitochondria and enlarged endoplasmic reticulum) which are also seen after
treatment with quinolones. In summary, we found no significant differences of the
integrin pattern on chondrocytes from joint cartilage of dogs at various
developmental stages. However, magnesium deficiency in immature dogs induced
similar clinical symptoms as quinolone treatment as well as distinct alterations 
in chondrocytic fibronectin staining and their ultrastructure. This corroborates 
our findings in rats where magnesium chelation is an important event in
quinolone-induced chondrotoxicity.

DOI: 10.1007/s002040050010 
PMID: 10663389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Arch Toxicol. 2000 Jan;73(10-11):564-72.

Chondrotoxicity of ciprofloxacin in immature beagle dogs: immunohistochemistry,
electron microscopy and drug plasma concentrations.

Stahlmann R(1), Kühner S, Shakibaei M, Schwabe R, Flores J, Evander SA, van
Sickle DC.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Abteilung Toxikologie,
Universitätsklinikum Benjamin Franklin, Freie Universität Berlin, Garystr. 5,
14195 Berlin, Germany.

The systemic effects of ciprofloxacin in immature Beagles were studied. Dogs of
10-11 weeks were dosed orally for 5 days with 0 (n=3), 30 (n=5) and 200 (n=5) mg 
ciprofloxacin/kg body wt. Plasma concentrations were measured by high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) 1 h after dosing (assuming to be peak
concentrations). In view of the high doses used, the plasma concentrations were
rather low and declined during the study period. For example, plasma
concentrations in the high dose group were 6.6 +/- 0.9 mg/l (day 1), 3.9 +/- 1.4 
mg/l (day 3), and 2.6 +/- 1.6 mg/l (day 5). In control dogs and in dogs treated
with the low dose of ciprofloxacin no pathological changes were seen by light
microscopy. However, cleft formation and erosions were observed in joint
cartilage from two of five dogs treated with 200 mg/kg. It is noteworthy that
despite the high dose used cartilage lesions were not detectable in all five dogs
of this group by light microscopy. Using antibodies against cell membrane
receptors (e.g. the alpha(5)beta(1)-integrin) or matrix components (fibronectin, 
collagen II) the articular cartilage effects were studied in detail by
immunohistochemistry. The most sensitive alteration was an increase in
fibronectin which was detectable in the vicinity of the lesions in cartilage
samples from the group of dogs administered the high dose. No clear-cut changes
were seen with the use of antibodies against other matrix components. Electron
microscopy revealed typical alterations in chondrocytes from dogs treated with
ciprofloxacin: e.g., swollen mitochondria and enlarged rough endoplasmic
reticulum. These changes were much more pronounced in dogs from the high dose
group than in dogs from the low dose group. Our main conclusion is that after
oral administration ciprofloxacin exhibits rather low chondrotoxicity, even in
the most sensitive species known to date. This correlates with the findings in
humans that ciprofloxacin seems to be less chondrotoxic than pefloxacin or other 
quinolones.

DOI: 10.1007/s002040050009 
PMID: 10663388  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Arch Dermatol Res. 1978 Sep 28;263(1):47-58.

Effects of 8-methoxypsoralen plus 365 nm UVA light on Candida albicans cells. An 
electron microscopic study.

Scherwitz C, Rassner G, Martin R.

Candida (C) albicans cells were exposed to 8-Methoxypsoralen (8-MOP)
concentrations of 1.0 microgram/ml and 10.0 microgram/ml medium and irradiated
with 365 nm light. The amount of energy emitted was 4.8 J/cm2. Two divergent
types of cell damage occured concerning yeast cell cytoplasm and cell wall. Two
hours after exposure cytoplasmic changes involving mitochondria, which showed
irregularities in shape, blurred appearance or loss of mitochondrial cristae and 
outer membrane were seen. The number of vacuoles was increased. The cytoplasm
showed large electron transparent areas, the cytoplasmic membrane disappeared in 
some areas completely. Nucleus and nuclear envelope usually remained intact in
early stages. 24h after exposure conspicuous cell wall alterations were observed 
in addition to cytoplasmic changes. Newly produced cell wall material formed
ball-like protrusions or was adherent sickle-shaped to the cell wall. The
investigations strongly suggest that the results found after 8-MOP-UVA treatment 
of C. albicans cells can not be interpreted in the sense of a general cytotoxic
effect. Apparently it takes the form of a combination of events involving
regressive and progressive alterations.


PMID: 363068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Arch Dermatol Res. 1978;263(1):47-58.

Effects of 8-methoxypsoralen plus 365 nm UVA light on Candida albicans cells. An 
electron microscopic study.

Scherwitz C, Rassner G, Martin R.

Candida (C.) albicans cells were exposed to 8-Methoxypsoralen (8-MOP)
concentrations of 1.0 microgram/ml and 10.0 micrograms/ml medium and irradiated
with 365 nm light. The amount of energy emitted was 4.8 J/cm2. Two divergent
types of cell damage occured concerning yeast cell cytoplasm and cell wall. Two
hours after exposure cytoplasmic changes involving mitochondria, which showed
irregularities in shape, blurred appearance or loss of mitochondrial cristae and 
outer membrane were seen. The number of vacuoles was increased. The cytoplasm
showed large electron transparent areas, the cytoplasmic membrane disappeared in 
some areas completely. Nucleus and nuclear envelope usually remained intact in
early stages. 24 h after exposure conspicuous cell wall alterations were observed
in addition to cytoplasmic changes. Newly produced cell wall material formed
ball-like protrusions or was adherent sickle-shaped to the cell wall. The
investigations strongly suggest that the results found after 8-MOP-UVA treatment 
of C. albicans cells can not be interpreted in the sense of a general cytotoxic
effect. Apparently it takes the form of a combination of events involving
regressive and progressive alterations.


PMID: 394689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Br J Haematol. 1975 Oct;31(2):135-48.

Ultrastructural studies of the bone marrow in sickle cell anaemia. I. The
structure of sickled erythrocytes and reticulocytes and their phagocytic
destruction.

Grasso JA, Sullivan AL, Sullivan LW.

Marrow aspirates from sickle cell patients were examined without prior
deoxygenation and revealed the presence of a variable proportion (10-30%) of
sickled red cells and reticulocytes. The main feature of sickled red cells was
the presence of 17.6 nm fibres arranged in hexagonal order, and to a lesser
extent in square or rectangular array, to form bundles of varying size and
compactness which occupied the entire cytoplasm. The sickling pattern in
reticulocytes was more variable. Some reticulocytes contained highly-ordered
bundles of 17.6 nm fibres whose structure and distribution was identical to that 
in red cells from whiich they could be distinguished only by their content of
organelles. Many reticulocytes exhibited less-organized fibre patterns ranging
from localized aggregates to poorly-ordered regions of short fibres and filaments
lacking apparent preferential orientation. In these cells, the bulk of the
cytoplasm was not polymerized. Haemoglobin polymerization in reticulocytes led to
entrapment of ribosomes in concentrated foci among the fibres. Frequently,
iron-laden mitochondria were associated with sickled reticulocytes. The variation
in pattern of sickling seen in reticulocytes is attributed to possible
differences in concentration of Hb S. Correlative studies have shown that fibres 
were not induced by fixation procedures. Marked phagocytic degradation of sickled
cells by macrophages was observed. The results are interpreted to indicate the
possible intramedullary phagocytosis of red cells and reticulocytes, predisposed 
to sickling in the marrow. However, the data are also consistent with the removal
of sickled elements from the circulating blood.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.1975.tb00844.x 
PMID: 1201233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Cell Biol. 1969 Dec;43(3):448-55.

Optical diffraction studies of crystalline structures in electron micrographs.
II. Crystalline inclusions in mitochondria of human hepatocytes.

Sternlieb I, Berger JE.

Unit cell dimensions of mitochondrial crystals were determined by optical
diffraction analysis of electron micrographs of human liver biopsy specimens.
Identical unit cells were found in pathologic material obtained from six patients
with Wilson's disease, from one patient with sickle-cell hepatitis, and from two 
normal subjects. These measurements led to the conclusion that the crystals
observed in patients and in normal subjects were probably chemically identical.
Furthermore, the relatively large size of the unit cell limits the choices for
its constituents to phospholipid micelles or to relatively large protein
molecules.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.43.3.448 
PMCID: PMC2107803
PMID: 5351401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc. 1968;66:788-826.

Vascular changes in the bulbar conjunctiva associated with sickle-cell disease:
some observations on fine structure.

Fink AI.


PMCID: PMC1310317
PMID: 5720854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Med Welt. 1967 Dec 16;50:3020-6.

[Significance of disorders of hemoglobin synthesis for the clinical practice].

[Article in German]

Mainzer K.


PMID: 5610824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

